 
 
ATTACHMENT F 
COORDINATION AGREEMENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
COORDINATION AGREEMENT BETWEEN ISO NEW ENGLAND INC. AND 
NEW BRUNSWICK SYSTEM OPERATOR 
 
 
 
Effective Date: 
December 1, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
 
Article 1.0 
 
Definitions 
Article 2.0 
 
Scope of Agreement 
Article 3.0 
 
Mutual Benefits 
Article 4.0 
 
Interconnected Operation 
Article 5.0 
 
Emergency Assistance 
Article 6.0 
 
Exchange of Information and Confidentiality 
Article 7.0 
 
Coordination Committee 
Article 8.0 
 
Reliability Coordination and Reliability Assessment of Outages 
Article 9.0 
 
Operational Information 
Article 10.0 
 
Interconnection Revenue Metering 
Article 11.0 
 
Liability 
Article 12.0 
 
Applicable Law 
Article 13.0 
 
License and Authorization 
Article 14.0 
 
Assignment 
Article 15.0 
 
Amendment 
Article 16.0 
 
Notices 
Article 17.0 
 
Dispute Resolution 
Article 18.0 
 
Representations 
Article 19.0 
 
Effective Date and Term 
Article 20.0 
 
Miscellaneous 
Schedule A: 
 
Description of Interconnection Facilities 
Schedule B: 
 
Procedures for Development and Authorization of Operating Instructions 
Schedule C: 
 
Emergency and Security Energy Transactions Schedule 
Attachment A – Emergency Energy 
Attachment B – Security Energy Pricing 
 
 
 
THIS AGREEMENT made this first day of April 2005 and revised on the first day of December 2007 and 
December 1, 2010. 
 
BETWEEN: 
 
NEW BRUNSWICK SYSTEM OPERATOR, a corporation established under section 40 of the 
Electricity Act (New Brunswick), having its Head Office in the City of Fredericton, New Brunswick, 
hereinafter called the “NBSO”. 
 
and 
 
ISO NEW ENGLAND INC., a not-for-profit, private corporation established under the laws of Delaware 
on May 30, 1997 that is the regional transmission organization for New England, hereinafter called “ISO-
NE”. 
 
RECITALS 
WHEREAS, ISO-NE and the NBSO are sometimes hereinafter referred to, collectively, as the “Parties” 
and, individually, as a “Party”; 
 
WHEREAS, the NBSO is a not-for-profit, independent corporation with its own Board of Directors 
whose primary responsibility is to ensure the Security and Reliability of the electricity system and 
administer and supervise the rules governing transmission access and to facilitate the development and 
operation of a competitive electricity market in New Brunswick; 
 
WHEREAS, ISO-NE is a not-for-profit, independent corporation that serves as the regional transmission 
organization (“RTO”) for New England and the independent system operator of the New England 
Transmission System and wholesale electricity marketplace, manages a comprehensive regional bulk 
power system planning process and is responsible for the day-to-day reliable operation of New England's 
bulk power system; 
 
WHEREAS, the NBSO, as the System Operator of the NBSO Controlled Grid and administrator of the 
New Brunswick market enters into coordination agreements and operating arrangements with the 
operators of neighboring Balancing Authority Areas, and with neighboring Transmission Operators, and 
 
 
coordinates system operation and emergency procedures with neighboring Balancing Authority Areas; 
and 
 
WHEREAS, ISO-NE, as RTO for the New England Transmission System and administrator of the New 
England markets enters into coordination agreements and operating arrangements with the operators of 
neighboring Balancing Authority Areas, and coordinates system operation and Emergency procedures 
with neighboring Balancing Authority Areas; 
 
WHEREAS, the NBSO and ISO-NE desire to continue coordinated interconnected operation formerly 
carried out by New Brunswick Power Corporation and ISO-NE to maintain Reliability for both of the 
power systems of the Maritime Provinces of Canada, and the six New England States within the United 
States of America (“USA”), recognizing the Parties desire to maximize interconnected capability under 
the terms and conditions contained in this Agreement; and  
 
WHEREAS, related to the Interconnection Facilities: 
 
A.  
ISO-NE is the Reliability Coordinator, Balancing Authority Operator, Transmission Operator, 
Market Operator, and Planning Authority for the six New England States and operates and is responsible 
for the secure operation of the New England Transmission System in accordance with its Transmission 
Operating Agreements with New England Transmission Owners and in compliance with the FERC-
approved ISO-NE Tariff (which includes the ISO-NE Market Rules) and the requirements and guidelines 
set forth by NERC or NPCC and, as such, has the power and authority to enter into this Agreement and 
perform its obligations under it.   
 
B.  
The NBSO is the Reliability Coordinator for the Canadian Maritime Provinces and the Northern 
Maine Market. The NBSO is also the Balancing Authority for the New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island 
and the Northern Maine Market. The NBSO is the Transmission Service Provider, the Market Operator 
and the Transmission Operator for the New Brunswick Transmission System and, as such, has the power 
and authority to enter into this Agreement and perform its obligations under it; 
 
C.  
The New England Transmission System and the New Brunswick Transmission System 
interconnect at a certain point of Interconnection as more specifically described in this Agreement and the 
Parties wish to record their agreement as to the operational and other matters addressed herein and 
pertaining to the Interconnection Facilities; and 
 
 
 
WHEREAS the Parties desire to manage the operational aspects of their interconnected operations by 
developing, administering and implementing practices, procedures and information relating to Reliability 
coordination and power system operation that will be managed and approved by a committee formed 
under this Agreement; 
 
NOW THEREFORE THIS AGREEMENT WITNESSES THAT in consideration of the mutual 
agreements and obligations between the Parties and for other good and valuable consideration ISO-NE 
and the NBSO agree as follows:  
 
ARTICLE 1.0:  
DEFINITIONS 
 
In this Agreement, the following words and terms shall have the meanings (such meanings to be equally 
applicable to both the singular and the plural forms) ascribed to them in this Article 1.0.  Terms used in 
the Agreement with initial capitalization that are not defined in the Article 1.0 shall have the meaning 
specified in the sections in which they are used. 
 
“Adequacy” means the ability of the electric system to supply electrical demand and energy requirements 
at all times, taking into account scheduled and unscheduled outages of system elements. 
 
“Agreement” means this Agreement and the Schedule(s) attached hereto and incorporated herein. 
 
“Balancing Authority Area” means an electric system or systems, bounded by Interconnection metering 
and telemetry, capable of controlling generation to maintain its interchange schedule with other Balancing 
Authority Areas and contributing to frequency regulation of the Interconnection Facilities as set forth by 
NERC. 
 
“Balancing Authority” means the entity responsible for the secure operation of a Balancing Authority 
Area as set forth by NERC.  
 
“Coordination Committee” means the jointly constituted ISO-NE and NBSO committee established to 
administer the terms and provisions of this Agreement pursuant to Article 7.0. 
 
 
 
“Delivery Point” means the international border between New England and New Brunswick. The 
Delivery Point is constituted of all of the points of direct Interconnection between the New England 
Balancing Authority Area and the NBSO Balancing Authority Area.  Such Delivery Point shall include 
(1) the point on the 345 kV Keene Road - Keswick  transmission line (3001 Line) between the State of 
Maine, USA and the Province of New Brunswick, Canada at which the line crosses the international 
boundary, (2) the point on the 345 kV Orrington - Point Lepreau transmission line (390/3016 Line) 
between the State of Maine, USA and the Province of New Brunswick, Canada at which the line crosses 
the international boundary, and/or such other Delivery Point(s) as the Coordination Committee shall 
determine.   
 
“Dispute” has the meaning attributed thereto in Article 17.0. 
 
“Effective Date” means the reference date of this Agreement as shown on the first page of this 
Agreement. 
 
“Electricity Act” means Chapter E-4.6 of the Revised Statutes of New Brunswick as amended from time 
to time. 
 
“Emergency” means any abnormal system condition that requires remedial action to prevent or limit loss 
of transmission or generation facilities that could adversely affect the Reliability of the electricity system. 
 
“Emergency Energy” means energy supplied from Operating Reserve or electrical generation available 
for sale in New Brunswick or New England or available from another Balancing Authority Area.  
Emergency Energy may be provided in cases of sudden and unforeseen outages of generating units, 
transmission lines or other equipment, or to meet other sudden and unforeseen circumstances such as 
forecast errors, or to provide sufficient Operating Reserve.  Emergency Energy is provided pursuant to 
this Agreement and priced according to Attachment A of Schedule C of this Agreement. 
 
“Force Majeure” means an event of force majeure as described in Section 11.1. 
 
“Good Utility Practice” means any of the practices, methods and acts engaged in or approved by a 
significant portion of the North American electric utility industry during the relevant time period, or any 
of the practices, methods and acts which, in the exercise of reasonable judgment in light of the facts 
known at the time the decision was made, could have been expected to accomplish the desired result 
 
 
consistent with good business practices, Reliability, safety and expedition. Good Utility Practice is not 
intended to be limited to the optimum practice, method, or act to the exclusion of all others, but rather to 
be acceptable practices, methods, or acts generally accepted by NERC. 
 
“Intentional Wrongdoing” means an act or omission taken or omitted by a Party with knowledge or 
intent that injury or damage could reasonably be expected to result.  
 
“Interconnection” means a connection between two or more individual Transmission Systems that 
normally operate in synchronism and have interconnecting Intertie(s). 
 
“Interconnection Facilities” means the Interconnections described in Schedule A.  
 
“Intertie” means a transmission line that forms part of an Interconnection. 
 
“ISO-NE Tariff” means the ISO New England Inc. Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff, which 
includes the ISO-NE Open Access Transmission Tariff and the ISO-NE Market Rules, Manuals and 
Operating Procedures. 
 
“Market Participant” means an entity that, for its own account, produces, transmits, sells, and/or 
purchases for its own consumption or resale capacity, energy, energy derivatives and ancillary services in 
the wholesale power markets.  Market Participants include transmission service customers, power 
exchanges, Transmission Owners, load serving entities, loads, holders of energy derivatives, generators 
and other power suppliers and their designated agents. 
 
“Metered Quantity” means apparent power, reactive power, active power, with associated time tagging 
and any other quantity that may be measured by a Party’s Metering Equipment and that is reasonably 
required by either Party for Security reasons or revenue requirements. 
 
“Metering Equipment” means the potential transformers, current transformers, meters, interconnecting 
wiring and recorders used to meter any Metered Quantity. 
 
“Mutual Benefits” as described in Article 3.0, means the transient and steady-state support that the 
integrated generation and Transmission Systems in New England and New Brunswick provide to each 
other inherently by virtue of being interconnected. 
 
 
 
“NBSO Market Rules” means the rules made from time to time, and any and all amendments thereto or 
replacements thereof, pursuant to the Electricity Act, and all policies, procedures, and guidelines 
contemplated thereby. 
 
“NERC” means the North American Electric Reliability Corporation or its successor organization. 
 
“New Brunswick Transmission System” means the integrated transmission facilities located in New 
Brunswick except for distribution systems operating at a nominal voltage level of less than 69 kV, as 
defined in the Electricity Act, and for which the NBSO has authority to direct operations pursuant to 
operating agreements.  For the purposes of the Reliability Coordinator functions, the operational footprint 
includes transmission facilities in the Canadian Maritime Provinces and the Northern Maine Market.  
 
“New England Transmission System” for the purpose of this Agreement means the system of 
transmission facilities, within the New England Balancing Authority Area that are under the ISO-NE’s 
operational jurisdiction, as defined in the ISO-NE Tariff.   
 
“Northern Maine Market” means the Transmission System radially connected to New Brunswick in the 
portion of northern Maine that includes Aroostook, Washington, and Penobscot Counties and the 
associated market for all energy and reliability-related services that is administered by the Northern 
Maine Independent System Administrator under its Tariff. 
 
"NPCC" means the Northeast Power Coordinating Council Inc. or its successor organization. 
 
"Operating Instructions" means the joint operating procedures, steps, and instructions for the operation 
of the Interconnection Facilities established and modified from time to time by the Coordination 
Committee in accordance with (a) Schedule B of this Agreement and (b) ISO-NE and NBSO individual 
procedures and processes. Operating Instructions are separate from ISO-NE and NBSO individual 
procedures and processes. 
 
“Operating Reserve” means generation capacity or load reduction capacity which can be called upon on 
short notice by either Party to replace scheduled energy supply which is unavailable as a result of an 
unexpected outage or to augment scheduled energy as a result of unexpected demand or other 
contingencies. 
 
 
 
“Operational Control” means Security monitoring, adjustment of generation and transmission 
resources, coordinating and approval of changes in transmission status for maintenance, determination of 
changes in transmission status for Reliability, coordination with other Balancing Authority Areas and 
Reliability Coordinators, voltage reductions and load shedding, except that each legal owner of generation 
and transmission resources continues to physically operate and maintain its own facilities. 
 
“Parties” means ISO-NE and NBSO and Party means either one of them. 
 
“Reliability” means the degree of performance of the bulk electric system that results in electricity being 
delivered within Reliability Standards and in the amount desired. Electric system Reliability can be 
addressed by considering two basic and functional aspects of the electric systems Adequacy and Security. 
 
“Reliability Coordinator” means an entity responsible for the operational Security of one or more 
Reliability Coordinator Areas and to perform Interconnection Security functions for such area(s) as set 
forth by NERC. 
 
“Reliability Coordinator Area” means that portion of the bulk electric system under the purview of the 
Reliability Coordinator. 
 
“Reliability Standards” means the criteria, standards and requirements relating to Reliability established 
by a Standards Authority. 
 
“Schedule” means a schedule attached to this Agreement and all amendments, supplements, 
replacements and additions hereto. 
 
“Security” means the ability of the electric system to withstand sudden disturbances including, without 
limitation, electric short circuits or unanticipated loss of system elements. 
 
“Security Energy” means energy delivered by the NBSO to ISO-NE in the event that the total net 
interchange between the New England and New Brunswick Balancing Authority Areas of market-based 
real-time transactions in a given hour is less than the minimum required in accordance with the applicable 
Operating Instructions with respect to the determination of minimum transfer limits.  Security Energy is 
 
 
provided pursuant to this Agreement and priced according to Attachment B of Schedule C of this 
Agreement. 
 
“Security Limits” means operating electricity system voltage limits, stability limits and thermal ratings. 
 
“Standards Authority” means the North American Electric Reliability Corporation, Northeast Power 
Coordinating Council, any successor thereof, or any other agency with authority over the Parties 
regarding standards or criteria to either Party relating to the Reliability of Transmission Systems. 
 
“Transmission Operating Agreement(s)” means the agreement(s) that establishes the terms and 
conditions under which the Transmission Owners transferred to ISO-NE Operational Control over 
designated transmission facilities. 
 
“Transmission Operator” means the entity that operates, or directs the operation of, the transmission 
facilities and equipment. 
 
“Transmission Owner” means an entity that owns a Transmission System. 
 
“Transmission Service Provider” means an entity that manages (under an agreement with Transmission 
Owners) a Transmission System that performs the functions of providing transmission services to 
qualified Market Participants under applicable transmission service agreements, and that determines 
transmission Adequacy by monitoring the interconnected system and performing actions to preserve local 
network integrity. 
 
“Transmission System” means a system for transmitting electricity, and includes any structures, 
equipment or other facilities used for that purpose. 
 
ARTICLE 2.0:  
SCOPE OF AGREEMENT 
 
2.1  
Amendment of Prior Agreement 
The terms of the prior agreement made between the Parties dated June 7, 2005 are hereby amended and 
superseded by the terms of this Agreement, to be effective on the date this Agreement is effective as set 
out in Article 19. 
 
 
 
2.2  
Purpose of this Agreement 
This Agreement provides for the reliable operation of the interconnected New England and New 
Brunswick Transmission Systems in accordance with the requirements of the Standards Authority.  
This Agreement establishes a structure and framework for the following functions related to the 
Reliability of interconnected operations between the Parties: 
 
(a) 
developing and issuing Operating Instructions and Security Limits; 
(b) 
coordinating operation of their respective Transmission Systems;  
(c) 
developing and adopting operating criteria and standards;  
(d) 
conducting operating performance reviews of the Interconnection Facilities;  
(e) 
considering matters related to transmission service and access;  
(f) 
implementing each Party’s respective NERC and NPCC requirements with regard to the New 
England Transmission System and New Brunswick Transmission System; and 
(g) 
exchanging information and coordinating regarding system planning; and 
(h) 
providing mutual assistance in an Emergency and during system restoration.  
 
The Parties shall, consistent with NPCC criteria and the Parties’ respective tariffs, rules and standards to 
the maximum extent they deem consistent with the safe and proper operation of their respective 
Reliability Coordinator Area and Balancing Authority Area and necessary coordination with other 
interconnected systems, and with the furnishing of dependable and satisfactory service to their own 
customers, operate their systems in accordance with the following procedures and principles.   
 
ARTICLE 3.0:  
MUTUAL BENEFITS 
 
3.1  
No Charge for Mutual Benefits of Interconnection 
Both the New England Transmission System and New Brunswick Transmission System, by virtue of 
being connected to each other and with a much larger Interconnection, share Mutual Benefits such as 
transient and steady-state support.  NBSO and ISO-NE shall not charge one another for such Mutual 
Benefits. 
 
3.2 
 Maintenance of Mutual Benefits 
The Parties shall endeavor to operate or direct the operation of the Interconnection Facilities to realize the 
Mutual Benefits.  The Parties recognize circumstances beyond their control, such as a result of operating 
 
 
configurations, contingencies, maintenance, or actions by third parties, may result in a reduction of 
Mutual Benefits.  
 
ARTICLE 4.0:  
INTERCONNECTED OPERATION 
 
4.1 Obligation to Remain Interconnected 
The Parties shall at all times during the term of this Agreement operate or direct the operation of their 
respective Transmission Systems so that they remain interconnected except: 
 
(a) 
during the occurrence of an event of Force Majeure which renders a Party unable to remain 
interconnected; 
(b) 
when an Interconnection is opened in accordance with the terms of an Operating Instruction or, if 
the Operating Instruction does not anticipate a particular circumstance where there is an imminent risk of 
equipment failure, or of danger to personnel or the public, or a risk to the environment, or risk the 
Reliability of a Transmission System, which cannot be avoided by Good Utility Practice; or 
(c) 
during planned maintenance where notice has been given in accordance with outage procedures 
as implemented by the Coordination Committee.  
 
4.2  
Adherence to NPCC Criteria, Guides and Procedures 
The Parties are participants in the NPCC and are required to comply with NPCC criteria, guides and 
procedures.  Such criteria, guides and procedures detail the many coordinating functions carried out by 
the Parties and this Agreement is intended to enhance this arrangement.  
 
4.3 
 Notification of Circumstances 
In the event that an Interconnection is opened or if the Interconnection Facility transfer capability is 
changed, or if a Party plans to initiate the opening of an Interconnection, or to change the transfer 
capability of the Interconnection Facilities, such Party shall immediately provide the other Party with 
notification indicating the circumstances of the opening or transfer capability change and expected 
restoration time, in accordance with procedures implemented by the Coordination Committee or 
applicable NPCC criteria, guides and procedures. 
 
4.4  
Compliance with Decisions of the Coordination Committee Direction 
ISO-NE shall direct the operation of the New England Transmission System and the NBSO shall direct 
the operation of the New Brunswick Transmission System in accordance with the obligations of their 
 
 
respective tariffs, rules and standards and applicable directions of the Coordination Committee that 
conform with their respective tariffs, rules and standards, except where prevented by Force Majeure.  The 
Coordination Committee direction includes decisions and jointly developed and approved Operating 
Instructions.  If decisions of the Coordination Committee do not anticipate a particular circumstance, the 
Parties shall act in accordance with Good Utility Practice. 
 
4.5  
Control and Monitoring 
Each Party shall provide or arrange for 24-hour control and monitoring of their portion of the 
Interconnection Facilities. 
 
4.6  
Reactive Transfer and Voltage Control 
The Parties agree to determine reactive transfers and control voltages in accordance with the provisions of 
NPCC Document B-03, “Guidelines for Inter-Area Voltage Control” and the “Reactive Power Flow 
Agreement” in place between the Parties and as revised from time to time. Real and reactive power will 
be transferred over the Interconnection Facilities as described in Schedule A where these circuit(s) cross 
the international boundary. 
 
4.7  
Inadvertent  
Inadvertent power transfers on all Interconnection Facilities shall be controlled and accounted for in 
accordance with the standards and procedures developed by NERC and NPCC and implemented by the 
Coordination Committee. 
 
4.8  
Adoption of Standards  
The Parties hereby agree to adopt, enforce and comply with requirements and standards that will 
safeguard Reliability of the interconnected Transmission Systems.  Such Reliability requirements and 
Reliability Standards shall be: 
(a) 
adopted and enforced for the purpose of providing reliable service;  
(b) 
not unduly discriminatory in substance or application; 
(c) 
applied consistently to both Parties; and  
(d) 
consistent with the Parties’ respective obligations to applicable Standards Authorities  including, 
without limitation, any relevant requirements or guidelines from each of NERC, NPCC or any other 
regional Standards Authority or regional transmission group to which the Parties are required to adhere. 
 
4.9  
New Brunswick New England IROL  
 
 
The Parties share a joint Interconnection Reliability Operating Limit (“IROL”) related to transfers on the 
transmission lines interconnecting the two Balancing Authority Areas.  Depending on the availability of 
reactive resources or system configuration, flow from New England to New Brunswick must be less than 
the real-time calculated limit (may actually be a negative number). This IROL is adhered to in order to 
ensure acceptable steady-state and transient performance of the New Brunswick and Maine Transmission 
Systems.  Both Parties will monitor this limit in accordance with this Agreement and independently 
determine the applicable import and export transfer limits.  Both Parties agree to operate the interface to 
the most conservative limits developed in real-time and the day-ahead planning process.  Both Parties will 
take coordinated corrective actions to avoid a violation of the IROL.  If a violation occurs, corrective 
actions will be taken to ensure that the violation is cleared as soon as possible, but definitely within thirty 
(30) minutes in accordance with NERC Reliability Standards.  
 
ARTICLE 5.0:  
EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE 
 
5.1  
Emergency Assistance  
Both Parties shall exercise due diligence to mitigate an Emergency to the extent practical as per each 
Party’s requirements in applicable policies and procedures governing the mitigation of an Emergency by 
NERC, NPCC, ISO-NE Tariff, NBSO Market Rules and NBSO Tariff.  In mitigating an Emergency, both 
Parties shall strive to allow for commercial remedies, but if commercial remedies are not successful the 
Parties agree to be the suppliers of last resort to ensure Reliability on the system.  
 
5.2  
Emergency Energy Transactions 
Each Party shall, to the maximum extent it deems consistent with the safe and proper operation of its 
respective Transmission System, provide Emergency Energy to the other Party in accordance with the 
provisions of Schedule C of this Agreement. 
 
ARTICLE 6.0:  
EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION AND CONFIDENTIALITY 
 
6.1  
Information 
ISO-NE and NBSO agree to exchange and share such information as may be required from time to time 
for the Coordination Committee to perform its duties and for the Parties to fulfill their obligations under 
this Agreement, subject to the requirements of existing confidentiality agreements or rules binding upon 
either of the Parties, including the ISO New England Information Policy, as it may be amended from time 
to time.  Such information will be comprised of the following: 
 
 
 
(a) 
Information required to develop Operating Instructions; 
(b) 
Transmission System facility specifications and modeling data required to perform Security 
analysis; 
(c) 
Functional descriptions and schematic diagrams of Transmission System protective devices and 
communication facilities; 
(d) 
Ratings data and associated ratings methodologies for the Interconnection Facilities; 
(e) 
Telemetry points, equipment alarms and status points required for real-time monitoring of 
Security dispatch;  
(f) 
Data required to reconcile accounts for inadvertent energy, and for Emergency Energy and 
Security Energy transactions;  
(g) 
Commercially valuable Transmission System information concerning such things as transfer 
capabilities, physical curtailments and interruptions, ancillary services, pricing for transmission service, 
and discounts offered on pricing for transmission service; provided, however, that commercially valuable 
Transmission System information shall not be shared by the receiving Party with any other party that is a 
Market Participant; and 
(h) 
Such other information as may be required for the Parties to maintain the reliable operation of 
their interconnected Transmission Systems and fulfill their obligations under this Agreement and to any 
Standards Authority of which either Party is a member, provided, however, that this other information 
will be exchanged only if that can be done in accordance with applicable restrictions on the disclosure of 
information to any Market Participant.  
 
6.2  
Confidentiality 
The Party receiving information pursuant to this Article 6.0 shall treat such information as confidential, 
and shall not, except as provided for in Section 6.3, disclose any of the information received without the 
prior written consent of the Party supplying the information.  The obligation of each Party under this 
Section 6.2 continues and survives the termination of this Agreement by seven (7) years. 
 
6.3  
Demands for Disclosure 
Confidential Information shall not include any information provided which: (a) is generally available to 
the electric industry or the public at the time of disclosure; (b) subsequent to receipt by the Recipient, 
becomes generally available to the electric industry or the public as a result of disclosure by the 
Disclosing Party or its representatives; (c) the Recipient can establish by credible evidence that it was 
available to the Recipient on a non-confidential basis prior to its disclosure to the Recipient; (d) 
 
 
subsequent to receipt by the Recipient, the Recipient can establish, by credible evidence that it became 
available to the Recipient on a non-confidential basis from a source other than the Disclosing Party or its 
Representatives without breach of this Agreement; (e) must be disclosed by law, including pursuant to 
freedom of information legislation, or pursuant to requirement of the Canadian government, the FERC, 
the USA Department of Energy (“DOE”), and any other governmental authority or tribunal having 
jurisdiction where there is no reasonable alternative to such disclosure; (f) must be disclosed by one of the 
Parties in connection with the performance of its duties and functions for reasons of power system 
operation or transmission tariff administration where there is no reasonable alternative to such disclosure; 
(g) must be disclosed by one of the Parties to a national or regional reliability council as a consequence of 
its membership in such a national or regional reliability council where there is no reasonable alternative to 
such disclosure.  Each Party retains all rights, title and interest in the Confidential Information it discloses 
to the other Party.  Each Party shall use at least the same standard of care to protect the Confidential 
Information it receives as it uses to protect its own Confidential Information. 
 
ARTICLE 7.0:  
 COORDINATION COMMITTEE 
 
7.1  
Coordination Committee Inauguration and Authorization 
The Parties shall form a Coordination Committee under this Agreement.  Within 30 days of the Effective 
Date, each of the Parties shall appoint two representatives, a principal and an alternate, to serve as 
members of the Coordination Committee with the authority to act on their behalf with respect to actions 
or decisions taken by the Coordination Committee.  A Party may, at any time upon providing prior notice 
to the other Party, designate a replacement principal member or alternate member to the Coordination 
Committee. 
 
7.2  
Coordination Committee Duties and Responsibilities 
The Coordination Committee exists to administer the implementation of the provisions of this Agreement.  
The Coordination Committee shall develop and adopt policies, instructions, and recommendations 
relating to the Parties' performance of their obligations under this Agreement, attempt to resolve Disputes 
between the Parties pursuant to Article 17.0 of this Agreement, and shall undertake any other actions 
specifically delegated to it pursuant to this Agreement. 
 
The Coordination Committee shall undertake to jointly develop and authorize Operating Instructions to 
implement the intent of this Agreement in accordance with Schedule B, ‘Procedures for Development and 
Authorization of Operating Instructions’.  To the extent that the Operating Instructions require 
 
 
participation by Local Control Centers and Transmission Owners in New England or the Maritimes 
Reliability Coordinator Area, those entities will be involved in the development process.   
 
Should the terms and conditions contained in this Agreement be found to conflict with or fail to recognize 
obligations of a Standards Authority of which either Party is a member or other regulatory requirements 
the Parties agree to amend this Agreement accordingly.  
Any effective recommendations on revisions to this Agreement shall be provided to each Party’s 
appropriate corporate officers for approval. 
 
7.3  
Limitations of Coordination Committee Authority 
With the exception of the Schedules, the Coordination Committee is not authorized to modify or amend 
any of the terms of this Agreement.  The Coordination Committee has no authority to commit either Party 
to any expenditure that is beyond those expenses described herein.  
 
7.4  
Exercise of Coordination Committee Duties 
The Coordination Committee shall hold meetings no less frequently than once each calendar year.  The 
matters to be addressed at all meetings shall be specified in an agenda, which shall contain items specified 
by either Party in advance of the meeting and sent to the representatives of the other Party.  All decisions 
of the Coordination Committee must be unanimous. Special meetings may be called at any time if the 
Coordination Committee deems such meetings to be necessary or appropriate. 
 
Subject to the limitations on its authority as described in Section 7.3 of this Agreement, the Coordination 
Committee has the responsibility and authority to take action on all aspects of this Agreement, including, 
but not limited to the following:  
 
(a) 
amending, adding or canceling Schedules, or Operating Instructions and providing written notice 
in accordance with Article 17.0  
(b) 
assessment of non-compliance with this Agreement and, subject to Article 17.0, the taking of 
appropriate action in respect thereof;  
(c) 
documentation of decisions related to the initial resolution of Disputes as set out in Article 17.0,or 
in cases of unresolved Disputes, the circumstances relevant to the Dispute in question as 
contemplated by the requirements of Article 17.0; and 
(d) 
preparation, documentation, retention and distribution of Coordination Committee meeting 
minutes and agendas.  
 
 
 
ARTICLE 8.0:  
RELIABILITY COORDINATION AND RELIABILITY 
ASSESSMENT OF OUTAGES 
 
Both Parties agree to provide each other with appropriate updates on planned outage schedules and other 
activities that may impact on the Reliability or availability of the interconnected New Brunswick 
Transmission System and New England Transmission System.  As Balancing Authority, the NBSO and 
ISO-NE shall interact with each other as required, and with other Balancing Authority Areas and 
Reliability Coordinators, to establish Security Limits and to perform Reliability coordination and 
Reliability assessments of outages. 
 
ARTICLE 9.0:  
OPERATIONAL INFORMATION 
 
9.1  
Obligation to Provide Operational Data and Status Points 
The Parties shall ensure that appropriate monitoring facilities are installed as required to provide for 
electric power quantities or equipment loading to enable monitoring of Security Limits, meet 
requirements of each of NERC and NPCC, and for determining Interconnection Facilities inadvertent 
energy accounting.  
 
9.2 Points of Operational Data 
The points of data for operating information are those points as may be agreed in writing by the 
Coordination Committee from time to time. 
 
ARTICLE 10.0:  
INTERCONNECTION REVENUE METERING 
 
10.1  
Obligation to Provide Inadvertent Energy Accounting Metering  
The Parties shall ensure appropriate electric metering devices are installed as required to measure electric 
power quantities for determining Interconnection Facilities inadvertent energy accounting.  
 
10.2  
Standards for Metering Equipment  
Any Metering Equipment used to meter Metered Quantities for inadvertent energy accounting shall be 
designed, verified, sealed and maintained in accordance with the Party’s respective metering standards or 
as otherwise agreed to by the Coordination Committee. 
 
 
 
10.3 
Meter Compensation to the Point of Interconnection 
The metering compensation for transmission line losses to the Interconnection Facilities Delivery Point 
shall be determined by the Party’s respective standards or otherwise agreed to by the Coordination 
Committee.   
 
10.4  
Metering Readings 
The Parties shall ensure that integrated meter readings are provided at least once each hour for 
Interconnection Facilities accounting purposes and meter registers are read at least monthly, as close as 
practical to the last hour of the month.  An appropriate adjustment shall be made to register readings not 
taken on the last hour of the month.  
 
ARTICLE 11.0:  
LIABILITY 
 
11.1  
Force Majeure 
A Party shall not be considered to be in default or breach of this Agreement, and shall be excused from 
performance or liability for damages to any other party, if and to the extent it shall be delayed in or 
prevented from performing or carrying out any of the provisions of this Agreement, arising out of or from 
any act, omission, or circumstance by or in consequence of any act of God, labor disturbance, sabotage, 
failure of contractors or suppliers of materials, act of the public enemy, war, invasion, insurrection, riot, 
fire, storm, flood, ice, earthquake, explosion, epidemic, breakage or accident to machinery or equipment 
or any other cause or causes beyond such Party’s reasonable control, including any curtailment, order, 
regulation, or restriction imposed by governmental, military or lawfully established civilian authorities, or 
by making of repairs necessitated by an emergency circumstance not limited to those listed above upon 
the property or equipment of the Party or property or equipment of others which is deemed under the 
Operational Control of the Party.  A Force Majeure event does not include an act of negligence or 
Intentional Wrongdoing by a Party.  Any Party claiming a Force Majeure event shall use reasonable 
diligence to remove the condition that prevents performance and shall not be entitled to suspend 
performance of its obligations in any greater scope or for any longer duration than is required by the 
Force Majeure event.  Each Party shall use its best efforts to mitigate the effects of such Force Majeure 
event, remedy its inability to perform, and resume full performance of its obligations hereunder. 
 
11.2  
Liability to Third Parties 
NBSO shall release, indemnify, and hold harmless ISO-NE from and against any and all damages, losses, 
liabilities, obligations, claims, demands, suits, proceedings, recoveries, judgments, settlements, costs and 
 
 
expenses, court costs, attorney fees, and all other obligations (each, an “Indemnifiable Loss”) asserted 
against ISO-NE by a person that is not a Party to this Agreement (a “Third Party”) including but not 
limited to any action by an NBSO employee, to the extent alleged to result from, arise out of or be related 
to such NBSO acts or omissions that give rise to such Indemnifiable Loss , including an NBSO directive 
or instruction to a Third Party; and (ii) ISO-NE shall release, indemnify, and hold harmless NBSO from 
and against any Indemnifiable Loss asserted against NBSO, by a Third Party, including but not limited to 
any action by an ISO-NE employee, to the extent alleged to result from, arise out of or be related to ISO-
NE’s acts or omissions that give rise to such Indemnifiable Loss, including an ISO-NE directive or 
instruction to a Third Party. 
 
11.3  
Liability Between Parties 
The Parties’ duties and standard of care with respect to each other, and the benefits and rights conferred 
on each other shall be no greater than as expressly stated herein.  Neither Party, its directors, officers, 
trustees, employees or agents, shall be liable to the other Party for any loss, damage, claim, cost, charge or 
expense, whether direct, indirect, incidental, punitive, special, exemplary or consequential, arising from 
the other Party's performance or nonperformance under this Agreement, except to the extent that a Party, 
is found liable for gross negligence or willful misconduct, in which case the Party responsible shall be 
liable only for direct and ordinary damages and not for any incidental, consequential, punitive, special, 
exemplary or indirect damage. 
 
11.4  
Liability for Interruptions 
Neither Party shall be liable to the other Party for any claim, demand, liability, loss or damage, whether 
direct, indirect, incidental, punitive, special, exemplary or consequential, resulting from an occurrence on 
the circuits and system that are under the Operational Control of the other Party and which results in 
damage to or renders inoperative such circuits and system, or the separation of the systems in an 
Emergency, or interrupts or diminishes service, or increases, decreases or in any way affects for whatever 
length of time the voltage or frequency of the energy delivered hereunder to the other Party. 
 
ARTICLE 12.0:  
APPLICABLE LAW 
 
12.1  
Applicable Law Governance 
This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the Province of New 
Brunswick where the NBSO is delivering energy to ISO-NE, and the Parties irrevocably attorn to the 
New Brunswick courts. 
 
 
 
This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of 
Massachusetts where ISO-NE is delivering energy to NBSO, and the Parties irrevocably attorn to the 
courts of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.  
 
12.2  
Sovereign Immunity 
To the extent that any Party has sovereign immunity or other immunity that might arise from being a 
subdivision of a political entity that would prevent any other Party from enforcing the terms of this 
Agreement pursuant to the Federal Sovereign Immunities Act (''FSIA''), but subject to any future 
amendment to that Act, the Parties acknowledge that all activities under this Agreement shall be deemed 
commercial activities and, thus, are qualified to be a commercial activity exception within the meaning of 
the FSIA so that any immunities that may be given to a Party pursuant to that Act do not apply to this 
Agreement. 
 
ARTICLE 13.0:  
LICENSE AND AUTHORIZATION 
 
The agreements and obligations expressed herein are subject to such initial and continuing governmental 
permission and authorization as may be required.  Each Party shall be responsible for securing and paying 
for any approvals required by it from any regulatory agency of competent jurisdiction relating to its 
participation in this Agreement and will reasonably cooperate with the other Party in seeking such 
approvals.  
 
ARTICLE 14.0:  
ASSIGNMENT 
 
This Agreement shall inure to the benefit of, and be binding upon and may be performed by, the 
successors and assigns of the Parties hereto respectively, but shall not be assignable by either Party 
without the written consent of the other.  
 
ARTICLE 15.0:  
AMENDMENT 
 
15.1  
Authorized Representatives 
No amendment of this Agreement shall be effective unless effected by written instrument duly executed 
by the Parties’ authorized representatives (except as provided for in Section 7.3 of this Agreement).  For 
 
 
the purposes of this section, an authorized person refers to individuals designated as such by Parties in 
their respective corporate by-laws. 
 
15.2  
Review of Agreement 
The terms of this Agreement are subject to review for potential amendment at the request of either Party.  
If, consequent to such review, the Parties agree that any of the provisions hereof, or the practices or 
conduct of either Party impose an inequity, hardship or undue burden upon the other Party, or if the 
Parties agree that any of the provisions of this Agreement have become obsolete or inconsistent with 
changes related to the Interconnection Facilities, the Parties shall endeavor in good faith to amend or 
supplement this Agreement in such a manner as will remove such inequity, hardship or undue burden, or 
otherwise appropriately address the cause for such change. 
 
15.3  
Mutual Agreement 
The Parties may amend this Agreement at any time by mutual agreement in accordance with Section 15.1 
above. 
 
ARTICLE 16.0:  
NOTICES 
 
Except as otherwise agreed from time to time, any notice, invoice or other communication which is 
required by this Agreement to be given in writing, shall be sufficiently given at the earlier of the time of 
receipt or deemed time of receipt if delivered personally to a senior official of the Party for whom it is 
intended or electronically transferred or sent by registered mail, addressed as follows: 
 
In the case of the NBSO to: 
New Brunswick System Operator 
        
 
 
 
77 Canada Street 
        
 
 
 
Fredericton, New Brunswick 
       
 
 
 
E3A 3Z3 
        
 
 
 
Attention: Secretary and General Counsel 
 
In the case of ISO-NE to: 
ISO New England Inc. 
        
 
 
 
One Sullivan Road 
        
 
 
 
Holyoke, Massachusetts 01040-2841 
        
 
 
 
Attention: Vice President of System Operations 
 
 
 
or delivered to such other person or electronically transferred or sent by registered mail to such other 
address as either Party may designate for itself by notice given in accordance with this section or 
delivered by any other means agreed to by the Parties hereto. 
 
Any notice, or communication so mailed shall be deemed to have been received on the third business day 
following the day of mailing, or if electronically transferred shall be deemed to have been received on the 
same business day as the date of the electronic transfer, or if delivered personally shall be deemed to have 
been received on the date of delivery or if delivered by some other means shall be deemed to have been 
received as agreed to by the Parties hereto. 
 
The use of a signed facsimile of future notices and correspondence between the Parties related to this 
Agreement shall be accepted as proof of the matters therein set out.  Follow-up with hard copy by mail 
will not be required unless agreed to by the Coordination Committee. 
 
ARTICLE 17.0:  
DISPUTE RESOLUTION 
 
In the event of a Dispute arising out of or relating to this Agreement that is not resolved by the 
representatives of the Parties who have been designated under Section 7.1 of this Agreement within 7 
days of the reference to such representatives of such Dispute, each Party shall, within 14 days’ written 
notice by either Party to the other, designate a senior officer with authority and responsibility to resolve 
the Dispute and refer the Dispute to them.  The senior officer designated by each Party shall have 
authority to make decisions on its behalf with respect to that Party’s rights and obligations under this 
Agreement.  The senior officers, once designated, shall promptly begin discussions in a good faith effort 
to agree upon a resolution of the Dispute.  If the senior officers do not agree upon a resolution of the 
Dispute within 14 days of its referral to them, or do not within the same 14 day period agree to refer the 
matter to some individual or organization for alternate Dispute resolution, then either Party shall have the 
right to pursue any and all remedies available to it at law or in equity. Neither the giving of notice of a 
Dispute, nor the pendency of any Dispute resolution process as described in this section shall relieve a 
Party of its obligations under this Agreement, extend any notice period described in this Agreement or 
extend any period in which a Party must act as described in this Agreement.  Notwithstanding the 
requirements of this section, either Party may terminate this Agreement in accordance with its provisions, 
or pursuant to an action at equity.  The issue of whether such a termination is proper shall not be 
considered a Dispute hereunder.   
 
 
 
ARTICLE 18.0:  
REPRESENTATIONS 
 
18.1  
Good Standing 
Each Party represents and warrants that it is duly organized, validly existing and in good standing under 
the laws of the state or province in which it is organized, formed, or incorporated, as applicable. 
 
18.2  
Authority to Enter Into Agreement  
Each Party represents and warrants that it has the right, power and authority to enter into this Agreement, 
to become a party hereto and to perform its obligations hereunder.  This Agreement is a legal, valid and 
binding obligation of such Party, enforceable against such Party in accordance with its terms. 
 
18.3  
Organizational Formation Documents 
Each Party represents and warrants that the execution, delivery and performance of this Agreement does 
not violate or conflict with the organizational or formation documents, bylaws, operating agreement, or 
agency agreement of such Party, or any judgment, license, permit, regulatory order, or governmental 
authorization applicable to such Party. 
 
18.4  
Regulatory Authorizations 
Each Party represents and warrants that it has, or applied for, all regulatory authorizations necessary for it 
to perform its obligations under this Agreement. 
 
ARTICLE 19.0:  
EFFECTIVE DATE AND TERM 
 
Subject to the conditions of Article 13.0  (License and Authorization) above, this Agreement shall take 
effect as of the date that all of the following have occurred: (i) upon the execution hereof by both Parties 
on the date set forth above; and (ii) all necessary governmental approvals for the effectiveness of this 
Agreement have been received.  This Agreement shall continue in force until terminated in accordance 
with this article. 
 
This Agreement may be terminated at any time by mutual agreement in writing.  It may also be 
terminated by either Party with prior written notice of at least ninety (90) days to the other Party of its 
intention to terminate. 
 
ARTICLE 20.0:  
MISCELLANEOUS 
 
 
 
20.1  
Performance 
The failure of a Party to insist, on any occasion, upon strict performance of any provision of this 
Agreement will not be considered a waiver of any right held by such Party.  Any waiver on any specific 
occasion by either Party shall not be deemed a continuing waiver of such right, nor shall it be deemed a 
waiver of any other right under this Agreement. 
 
20.2  
Rights , Remedies, or Benefits 
This Agreement is not intended to and does not create any rights, remedies, or benefits of any kind 
whatsoever in favor of any entities other than the Parties, their principals and, where permitted, their 
assigns.  
 
20.3  
Agreement 
This Agreement, including all Attachments attached hereto, is the entire agreement between the Parties 
with respect to the subject matter hereof, and supersedes all prior or contemporaneous understandings or 
agreements, oral or written, with respect to the subject matter of this Agreement. 
 
20.4  
Governmental Authorizations 
This Agreement, including its future amendments is subject to the initial and continuing governmental 
authorizations required to establish, operate and maintain the Interconnection Facilities as herein 
specified.  Each Party shall take all actions necessary and reasonably within its control to maintain all 
governmental rights and approvals required to perform its respective obligations under this Agreement. 
 
20.5  
Unenforceable Provisions 
If any provision of this Agreement is deemed unenforceable, the rest of the Agreement shall remain in 
effect and the Parties shall negotiate in good faith and seek to agree upon a substitute provision that will 
achieve the original intent of the Parties. 
 
20.6  
Execution 
This Agreement may be executed in multiple counterparts, each of which shall be considered an original 
instrument, but all of which shall be considered one and the same Agreement, and shall become binding 
when all counterparts have been signed by each of the Parties and delivered to each Party hereto.  
Delivery of an executed signature page counterpart by telecopier shall be as effective as delivery of a 
manually executed counterpart. 
 
 
 
20.7  
Payments 
Unless otherwise indicated in writing by the Parties, all payments due under this Agreement will be 
effected in immediately available funds of the USA. 
 
20.8  
Regulatory Authority 
If any Regulatory Authority having jurisdiction (or any successor boards or agencies), a court of 
competent jurisdiction or other governmental entity with the appropriate jurisdiction (collectively, the 
''Regulatory Bodies'') issues a rule, regulation, law or order that has the effect of cancelling, changing or 
superseding any term or provision of this Agreement (the ''Regulatory Requirement''), then this 
Agreement will be deemed modified to the extent necessary to comply with the Regulatory Requirement. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Regulatory Authority materially modifies the terms and conditions 
of this Agreement and such modification(s) materially affect the benefits flowing to one or both of the 
Parties, as determined by either of the Parties within twenty (20) business days of the receipt of the 
Agreement as materially modified, the Parties agree to attempt in good faith to negotiate an amendment 
or amendments to this Agreement or take other appropriate action(s) so as to put each Party in effectively 
the same position in which the Parties would have been had such modification not been made.  In the 
event that, within sixty (60) days or some other time period mutually agreed upon by the Parties after 
such modification has been made, the Parties are unable to reach agreement as to what, if any, 
amendments are necessary and fail to take other appropriate action to put each Party in effectively the 
same position in which the Parties would have been had such modification not been made, then either 
Party shall have the right to unilaterally terminate this Agreement forthwith.  
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the Parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be executed in duplicate as of 
the day and year first written above. 
 
 
NEW BRUNSWICK SYSTEM OPERATOR 
 
____________________________________  
BySylvain Gignac, President and Chief Executive Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
ISO NEW ENGLAND INC. 
 
_______________________________________ 
ByVamsi Chadalavada, Senior Vice President and  
Chief Operating Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
SCHEDULE A:   
DESCRIPTION OF INTERCONNECTION FACILITIES 
 
 
This Schedule A to the Agreement covers the New England – New Brunswick Interconnection Facilities 
under the Operational Control of the NBSO and ISO-NE. 
 
There is only one Interconnection (i.e., the New England – New Brunswick Interconnection) that makes 
up the New England – New Brunswick Interconnection Facilities.  For Operational Control purposes, the 
point of demarcation for the Interconnection is the point at which the New England – New Brunswick 
Interconnection crosses the USA-Canada boundary. 
 
List of Interconnection(s) 
 
The New England-New Brunswick Interconnection is comprised of the following two (2) Interties (as 
ordered from South to North: 
 
1. 
390/3016 Intertie 
A 345 kV AC transmission circuit, designated the 390 Line/3016 Line, connecting the Orrington 
transmission substation in the State of Maine, USA to the Point Lepreau transmission substation in the 
Province of New Brunswick, Canada.  The common meter point for this Intertie is located at the Point 
Lepreau transmission substation. 
 
2. 
3001 Intertie 
 
A 345 kV AC transmission circuit, designated the  3001 Line, connecting the Keene Road transmission 
substation in the State of Maine, USA to the Keswick transmission substation in the Province of New 
Brunswick, Canada.  The common meter point for this Intertie is located at the Keswick transmission 
substation 
 
 
 
 
 
SCHEDULE B:   
PROCEDURES FOR DEVELOPMENT AND 
AUTHORIZATION OF OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS 
 
Overview 
Operating Instructions (a) will be developed and recorded by the Coordination Committee in accordance 
with this Schedule B, (b) will be contained in a document separate from this Agreement, and (c) may be 
modified by the Coordination Committee without amending this Agreement. 
 
The Coordination Committee shall jointly develop and approve Operating Instructions and review them at 
least annually. The Coordination Committee shall submit draft material to one another for review and 
comment. The Coordination Committee shall provide comment on the draft material promptly. The 
Coordination Committee shall promptly provide such information as may reasonably be required in 
connection with establishing, or reviewing, the material.  In the event that any conflicts arise or are made 
apparent to a Party, they shall notify the other Party and engage the Coordination Committee if necessary 
to resolve such conflicts. 
 
The Coordination Committee will periodically review applicable ISO-NE and NBSO individual 
procedures and processes to determine any benefits of sharing these procedures and processes. These 
benefits may be for the purpose of training or to satisfy Reliability Standards. The Coordination 
Committee will determine how best to share these individual procedures and processes. 
 
A list of Operating Instructions and applicable ISO-NE and NBSO individual procedures will be 
maintained by the Coordination Committee and posted on an appropriate location on the respective 
individual websites of the Parties. 
 
Outlined below are the key principles and items of methodology to be observed while the Coordination 
Committee is engaged in developing and approving Operating Instructions, and issuing them to their 
respective operations staff. 
 
Principles 
Given that the Parties’ respective operations staff benefit from following a single instruction for all 
aspects of their execution of interconnected operations, it is an acceptable practice to combine this content 
to achieve the single Operating Instructions for use by a respective Party’s operations staff.  The preferred 
 
 
methodology when appropriate is to use the NPCC criteria, guides and procedures for the coordination 
and operation of the interconnected Transmission Systems.  When the NPCC documentation is 
insufficient to accomplish this task separate instructions will be developed in accordance with this 
schedule. 
 
Each Party shall coordinate the issuance internally of any Operating Instructions developed and agreed to 
by the Coordination Committee to ensure that their respective operations staff have these Operating 
Instructions.  In addition annual review of the Operating Instructions and the Parties internal procedures 
associated with the Operating Instructions shall be conducted by the Coordination Committee to ensure 
consistency. 
 
Operating Instructions, when approved by the Coordination Committee, shall be binding on the Parties 
insofar as they relate to the Interconnection Facilities until they expire, are changed, deleted, or 
superseded by authority of the Coordination Committee. 
 
Items of Methodology 
Each page of the approved Operating Instructions shall be identified in the header or footer as the NBSO 
– ISO-NE Coordination Committee’s with the Effective Date and any revision number.   
 
By mutual agreement of the Coordination Committee, either the NBSO or ISO-NE shall control the 
revision process from the initial drafting of material through to the conversion of the Operating 
Instruction into its final form. 
 
 
 
 
SCHEDULE C:   
EMERGENCY AND SECURITY ENERGY TRANSACTIONS SCHEDULE 
 
WHEREAS, ISO-NE, as the independent system operator of the Transmission System in New England 
and the administrator of the New England markets, arranges for the sale and purchase of Emergency 
capacity and energy on behalf of Market Participants with neighboring Balancing Authority Areas, all in 
accordance with the ISO-NE Tariff, which includes the Open Access Transmission Tariff and Market 
Rules; 
 
WHEREAS, ISO-NE is the administrator of the ISO-NE Tariff and is responsible for, among other 
matters, procuring and acting as supplier of last resort of ancillary services (including arranging for the 
sale and purchase of Emergency capacity and energy with neighboring Balancing Authority Areas), in 
accordance with the ISO-NE Tariff; 
 
WHEREAS, either of the Parties may, from time to time, have insufficient Operating Reserve available 
on the respective systems that they operate, or need to supplement available resources to cover sudden 
and unforeseen circumstances such as loss of equipment or forecast errors, and such conditions could 
result in the need to arrange for the purchase of Emergency Energy for Reliability reasons; 
 
WHEREAS, from time to time, the total net interchange between the New England and New Brunswick 
Balancing Authority Areas of market-based real-time transactions in a given hour may be less than the 
minimum required flow from New Brunswick to New England on the New England to New Brunswick 
Interconnection, in accordance with the applicable Operating Instructions with respect to the 
determination of minimum transfer limits, and such conditions could result in the need to arrange for the 
purchase of Security Energy for Reliability reasons; and  
 
WHEREAS, the Parties wish to provide for the terms and conditions pursuant to which either Party may 
arrange for the purchase of such Security Energy for its system from the other Party and specify the prices 
for such purchases and sales. 
 
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the premises and of the mutual covenants herein set forth, the 
Parties mutually agree as follows: 
 
ARTICLE 1.0:   
DELIVERY POINT 
 
 
 
1.1 
The Delivery Point for energy delivered pursuant to the terms of this Schedule shall be the 
international border between New England and New Brunswick. The Delivery Point is constituted of all 
of the points of direct Interconnection between the New England Balancing Authority Area and the 
NBSO Balancing Authority Area. Such Delivery Point shall include (1) the point on the 345 kV Keene 
Road - Keswick transmission line (3001 Line) between the State of Maine, USA and the Province of New 
Brunswick, Canada at which the line crosses the international boundary, and (2) the point on the 345 kV 
Orrington - Point Lepreau transmission line (390/3016 Line) between the State of Maine, USA and the 
Province of New Brunswick, Canada at which the line crosses the international boundary, and/or such 
other Delivery Point(s) as the Coordination Committee shall determine. 
 
1.2 
Unless otherwise agreed by the Coordination Committee, the price for energy for an hour 
delivered pursuant to this Schedule shall include all transmission costs of delivering such energy to the 
Delivery Point in that hour, and the Party taking delivery of such energy for the hour shall be responsible 
for all transmission costs beyond the Delivery Point for that hour. 
 
ARTICLE 2.0:   
CHARACTERISTICS OF EMERGENCY AND SECURITY ENERGY 
 
All Emergency Energy and Security Energy made available under this Schedule shall be three phase, 60 
Hz alternating current at operating voltages established at the Delivery Point in accordance with system 
requirements and appropriate to the Interconnection Facilities or other such characteristics as may be 
agreed upon by the Parties. 
 
ARTICLE 3.0:   
NATURE OF SERVICE 
 
3.1 
ISO-NE and the NBSO shall, to the maximum extent each deems consistent with the safe and 
proper operation of its system, the furnishing of economical, dependable and satisfactory services by its 
participants, and the obligations of its participants to other parties, make available to the other Party when 
a system Emergency exists on the other Party's system, Emergency Energy from its system's available 
generating capability in excess of the system’s load requirements (i.e., load requirements alone, not load 
plus reserve requirements) up to the transfer limits in use between the two Balancing Authority Areas.  
Emergency Energy is provided in cases of emergency outages of generating units, transmission lines or 
other equipment, or to meet other sudden and unforeseen circumstances such as forecast errors, or to 
provide sufficient Operating Reserve.  Normally, a Party requests Emergency Energy from the other Party 
 
 
as a last resort, when market-based real-time energy transactions are not available, or not available in a 
timely fashion in order to maintain its ten-minute reserve requirement.  At the time the Emergency 
Energy sale is being initiated, the Party delivering such Emergency Energy shall describe the Emergency 
Energy transaction as being one of the following: (1) “delivered out of ten-minute reserve”; (2) “delivered 
out of thirty-minute reserve” where such a delivery could reasonably be expected to be recalled if the 
Party delivering the Emergency Energy needed the generation for a reserve pick-up or other Emergency; 
or (3) “delivered above and beyond ten-minute and thirty-minute reserves” where the Party delivering 
such Emergency Energy is normally expected to be able to continue delivering the energy following a 
reserve pick-up. 
 
3.2 
The Parties are participants in NPCC and are expected to comply with NPCC criteria, guides and 
procedures.  Such NPCC criteria include “Emergency Operation Criteria” (Document A-3), which 
describes the basic factors to be considered by a Balancing Authority Area in formulating plans and 
procedures to be followed in an Emergency.  A principle of operation in this NPCC criteria is that upon 
receiving a request for assistance to mitigate an Emergency, a Balancing Authority Area would provide 
“maximum reasonable assistance” to a neighboring Balancing Authority Area.  Such reasonable 
assistance would not normally require the shedding of firm load. 
 
3.3 
Normally, the Party experiencing or anticipating an Emergency would request Emergency Energy 
from the other Party in accordance with this Schedule and applicable NPCC criteria, guides and 
procedures after all market-based real-time transactions have been scheduled, unless there is an 
immediate need for such Emergency Energy in order to maintain system Reliability. 
 
3.4 
The Parties agree to arrange for the delivery of Security Energy, as needed, which shall be priced 
in accordance with Attachment B of this Schedule.  Prior to the purchase of Security Energy in 
accordance with Attachment B of this Schedule, ISO-NE will take the following actions (unless exigent 
circumstances dictate otherwise), as necessary and in the following order, in coordination with Market 
Participants and the New Brunswick System Operator to avoid or correct the violation of the minimum 
flow requirement:   
 
1. Curtail exports from New England to New Brunswick. 
2. Request Security Energy Transactions (SETs) 
 
 
 
a. 
ISO-NE will post a message, “Special Request for Security Energy Transactions,” to the 
“Special Notices” section of the ISO-NE external website.  The special notice will request the 
submittal of SETs for specified hour(s) and amount(s). 
 
b. 
SETs may be submitted to ISO-NE via the external transaction scheduling software as 
imports with the designation,  “Security Energy Transactions” and may be submitted as either 
Self-Scheduled (“Real-Time without Price”) or Dispatchable (“Real-Time with Price”).  SETs 
may be submitted up to sixty minutes prior to the top of the hour in which the transaction is 
requested to begin.  
 
3. Energy (including Security Energy Transactions) is scheduled for the next hour to the required MW 
level, based on economics, from all available offers in sufficient quantity to correct the potential or actual 
violation. 
 
4. If steps 1 through 3 above do not fully correct the potential or actual violation, then Control-Area-to-
Control-Area Security Energy will be scheduled in accordance with the provisions of Attachment B to 
satisfy the minimum flow requirement.  
 
3.5 
In the event a Party is unable to provide Emergency or Security Energy to the other when needed, 
but there is energy available from a third-party Balancing Authority Area supplier, the Party will use 
reasonable efforts to transmit such energy to the other Party where feasible.  
 
ARTICLE 4.0:   
RATES AND CHARGES 
 
4.1 
The charge for Emergency Energy delivered to the NBSO or to ISO-NE shall be as set forth in 
Attachment A, attached hereto.  
 
4.2 
The charge for Security Energy delivered to ISO-NE shall be as set forth in Attachment B, 
attached hereto. 
 
ARTICLE 5.0:  
MEASUREMENT OF ENERGY INTERCHANGED 
 
5.1 
All energy supplied at the Delivery Point shall be metered at the NBSO’s Keswick and Point 
Lepreau Substations.  The metered amounts shall be adjusted for actual losses to the Delivery Point.   
 
 
This adjustment will be done to compensate for the difference in location between the Delivery Point and 
the meters.  
 
5.2 
Any properly designated representative of either of the Parties hereto shall have access, through 
coordination with the meter owner, during normal business hours, to all of the billing meters for the 
purpose of reading the same.  The accuracy of the meters shall be verified by proper tests periodically and 
at any other time upon reasonable notice given by either of the Parties to the other, and each of the Parties 
shall be entitled to have a representative present at such verification, subject to coordination with the 
meter owner.  In the event errors greater than +/-2% should be discovered, retroactive billing adjustments, 
if any, shall be determined by the Coordination Committee. 
 
ARTICLE 6.0:   
BILLING AND PAYMENT 
 
6.1 
The procedure for rendering and payment of invoices for transactions pursuant to this Schedule 
shall be as set out hereunder unless otherwise agreed by the Coordination Committee. 
 
6.2 
Promptly after the end of each calendar month, the Party delivering energy pursuant to this 
Schedule shall prepare or cause to be prepared and render an invoice to the other Party covering all 
transactions conducted under the terms of this Schedule during such calendar month.  All transactions will 
be billed based on the schedule of energy agreed to by the Parties.   
 
6.3 
All invoices rendered by a Party shall be payable by the other Party in currency of the USA by 
electronic bank transfer, or in such other manner as is agreed to by the Coordination Committee, on the 
later of (1) the twentieth day of each month or the first common banking day after the nineteenth day of 
the month whichever is later (the “Due Date”). 
 
6.4 
The currency exchange rate used to convert Canadian dollars, where required, to U.S. dollars in 
preparing the invoice will be that quoted by the Bank of Canada at noon on the last banking day of the 
month in which the Emergency or Security Energy being invoiced was delivered. 
 
6.5 
If the rendering of an invoice is unavoidably delayed, a Party may issue an interim invoice based 
on estimated charges.  Each invoice shall be subject to adjustment for any errors in calculation, meter 
readings, estimating or otherwise.  Any such billing adjustments shall be made as promptly as practical, 
but in no event later than six months after issuing the invoice. 
 
 
 
6.6 
Any amount not paid by the Due Date shall be subject to interest, calculated from the due date of 
the invoice to the date of payment, in accordance with the methodology specified for interest on refunds 
in the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission’s regulations at 18 C.F.R. § 35.19a (a) (2) (iii). 
 
6.7 
If any invoice remains unpaid by a Party for thirty (30) days after the Due Date, the Party 
rendering the invoice may, in addition to all other remedies available to it, and after giving the other Party 
at least five days written notice of the its intention to do so, present the issue in question to that Party’s 
Board of Directors.  The Party’s Board of Directors shall contact the other Party’s Board of Directors or 
its designee to develop a solution to a billing Dispute pursuant to Article 17 of this Agreement.  The 
Boards of Directors may also choose to submit the billing Dispute to a form of alternative dispute 
resolution to which the Boards of Directors may agree.  Such action shall not be construed as a breach of 
contract by the Party rendering the invoice and shall not relieve the other Party of its obligations to pay 
for energy in accordance with the provisions of this Schedule. 
 
6.8 
The applicable provisions of this Schedule shall continue in effect after termination of this 
Schedule to the extent necessary to provide for final billing, billing adjustments, payments and disposition 
of any claims outstanding. 
 
6.9 
Each Party warrants that it has, or will have, the agreements and procedures in place to ensure the 
collection of payments from its participants for the delivery of Emergency or Security Energy to it from 
the other Party. 
 
ARTICLE 7.0:   
RECORDS 
 
7.1 
Each Party hereto shall keep or cause to be kept complete and accurate records and memoranda of 
its operations hereunder and shall maintain such data as may be necessary to determine with reasonable 
accuracy any item required hereunder.  With respect to invoicing records, each Party shall maintain or 
cause to be maintained such records, memoranda and data for the current calendar year plus the previous 
calendar year.  The Coordination Committee shall have the right to examine all such records and 
memoranda that are not confidential in so far as may be reasonably necessary for the purpose of 
ascertaining the reasonableness and accuracy of any statements of costs relating to transactions hereunder. 
 
 
Attachment A 
 
To the Emergency and Security Energy Transactions Schedule 
 
Emergency Energy Pricing 
In accordance with the Emergency and Security Energy Transactions Schedule between the NBSO and 
ISO-NE, the charge for Emergency Energy delivered to the Delivery Point by the NBSO or ISO-NE to 
the other shall be as defined within this Attachment A. 
 
A.1. 
 
Direct NBSO/ISO-NE Emergency Energy Transaction 
 
These are requests made by NBSO or ISO-NE to receive Emergency Energy in support of emergency 
reliability conditions presented by inadequate energy on its system that could not be supplied through the 
market. 
 
The charge for Emergency Energy shall be calculated using the following two-part formula.  The first part 
of the formula calculates the Energy Charge portion of the charge and the second part incorporates any 
Transmission Charge reasonably associated with the delivery of the Emergency Energy to the Delivery 
Point. 
 
The Emergency Energy Charge (for an hour) 
 
The Emergency Energy Charge for an hour = 
 
(Emergency Energy supplied in the hour in megawatthour(s) (“MWh”)) 
*  
(Delivering Party’s Cost of such energy in $/MWh) 
* 
110% 
 
The Emergency Energy Transmission Charge (for an hour) 
 
Emergency Energy Transmission Charge to the Delivery Point for an hour = 
the actual ancillary services costs and any transmission costs reasonably associated with the delivery of 
such Emergency Energy for an hour by the delivering Party to the Delivery Point pursuant to the 
applicable tariff of the delivering Party , as filed with and accepted by the governmental agency with 
jurisdiction over such tariff. 
 
 
 
The Total Charge for Emergency Energy Supplied in an Hour 
 
The Total Charge for Emergency Energy Supplied in an Hour = 
 
(the Emergency Energy Charge for an hour) 
+ 
(the Emergency Energy Transmission Charge for that same hour). 
 
In the case of the NBSO as delivering Party, the Cost of energy shall be the Market Clearing price (in 
$U.S./MWh) at the external node associated with the Delivery Point 1(as used in the NBSO Market 
System for energy exports from the NBSO Balancing Authority Area into the New England Balancing 
Authority Area, as such pricing node is defined in NBSO Market Rules and determined by the NBSO) for 
the hour of the Emergency Energy delivery. 
 
In the case of ISO-NE as the delivering Party, the Cost of energy shall be the Locational Marginal Price 
(in $U.S./MWh) at the external node associated with the Delivery Point 2 (as used in the New England 
Market System for energy exports from the New England Balancing Authority Area into the NBSO 
Balancing Authority Area, as such pricing node is defined in Market Rule 1 and determined by ISO-NE) 
for the hour of the Emergency Energy delivery.  
 
A.2. 
NBSO/ISO-NE Emergency Energy Transaction From Third-Party Balancing Authority 
Area Supplier 
 
These are requests made by NBSO or ISO-NE to deliver Energy to the other to address system balancing 
or other reliability conditions present on the exporting system, which could not be accomplished through 
the market. 
 
The charge for Emergency Energy supplied to a Party from a third-party Balancing Authority Area 
supplier shall be calculated using the following two-part formula.  The first part of the formula calculates 
the Energy Charge portion of the charge, which in this case includes the total charge (energy and 
transmission) that the third-party Balancing Authority Area supplier charges for delivery of the 
Emergency Energy to the delivering Party’s Balancing Authority Area border.  The second part of the 
                                                           
1 In the case of the NBSO as the delivering Party, the external node associated with the Delivery Point shall be:  
New Brunswick Node. 
2 In the case of the ISO as the delivering Party, the external node associated with the Delivery Point shall be:  
Salisbury 345. 
 
 
formula incorporates any Transmission Charges reasonably associated with the delivery of the Emergency 
Energy by the delivering Party through its system to the Delivery Point.    It is expected that that all such 
third-party Balancing Authority Area supplier charges will be in accordance with rates filed and approved 
by the governmental body with jurisdiction over such rates.  
 
The Emergency Energy Charge (for an hour) 
 
Emergency Energy Charge for an hour = 
 
(Emergency Energy supplied in the hour in MWh) 
* 
(Third-Party Balancing Authority Area supplier’s total charge for such energy in $/MWh) 
 
(Note: 10% adder does not apply to pricing of Emergency Energy from third-party Balancing Authority 
Area suppliers.)   
 
The Emergency Energy Transmission Charge (for an hour) 
 
Emergency Energy Transmission Charge to the Delivery Point for an hour = 
The actual ancillary services costs and any transmission costs reasonably associated with the delivery of 
such energy for an hour to the Delivery Point pursuant to the applicable tariff of the delivering Party, as 
filed with and accepted by the governmental agency with jurisdiction over such tariff. 
 
The Total Charge for Emergency Energy Supplied in an Hour 
 
The Total Charge for Emergency Energy Supplied in an Hour = 
 
(the Emergency Energy Charge for an hour) 
+ 
(the Emergency Energy Transmission Charge for that same hour). 
 
 
 
 
 
ATTACHMENT B 
 
To the Emergency and Security Energy Transactions Schedule 
 
Security Energy Pricing 
 
In accordance with the Emergency and Security Energy Transactions Schedule between the NBSO and 
ISO-NE, the charge for Security Energy delivered to the Delivery Point (as defined in 1.1 of the 
Schedule) by the NBSO to ISO-NE shall be as defined within this Attachment B. 
 
B.1. 
Direct NBSO/ISO-NE Security Energy Transaction 
 
The charge for Security Energy shall be calculated using the following two-part formula.  The first part of 
the formula calculates the Energy Charge portion of the charge and the second part incorporates any 
Transmission Charge reasonably associated with the delivery of the Security Energy to the Delivery 
Point. 
 
The Security Energy Charge (for an hour) 
 
Security Energy Charge for an hour = 
 
(Security Energy supplied in the hour in MWh) 
*  
(Delivering Party’s Cost of such energy in $/MWh) 
 
(Note: 10% adder does not apply to Security Energy pricing.) 
 
The delivering Party’s Cost of energy shall be the lesser of: 
 
(a) 
the Market Clearing price (in $U.S./MWh) at the external node associated with the Delivery 
Point3 (the external node used in the NBSO Market System for energy exports from the NBSO Balancing 
Authority Area into the New England Balancing Authority Area, as such pricing node is defined in NBSO 
Market Rules and determined by the NBSO) for the hour of the Security Energy delivery; or 
 
                                                           
3 The external node associated with the Delivery Point shall be : New Brunswick Node. 
 
 
(b) 
the Locational Marginal Price (in $U.S./MWh) at the external node associated with the Delivery 
Point4 (as used in the New England Market System for energy exports from the New England Balancing 
Authority Area into the NBSO Balancing Authority Area, as such pricing node is defined in Market Rule 
1 and determined by ISO-NE) for the hour of the Security Energy delivery. 
 
In no case shall the charge for the Security Energy be less than $0/MWh regardless of the calculated price 
in the NBSO Balancing Authority Area or the New England Balancing Authority Area.  
 
The Security Energy Transmission Charge (for an hour) 
 
Security Energy Transmission Charge to the Delivery Point for an hour = 
The actual ancillary services costs and any transmission costs reasonably associated with the delivery of 
such energy for an hour by the delivering Party to the Delivery Point pursuant to the applicable tariff of 
the delivering Party. 
 
The Total Charge for Security Energy Supplied in an Hour 
 
The Total Charge for Security Energy Supplied in an Hour = 
 
(the Security Energy Charge for an hour) 
+ 
(the Security Energy Transmission Charge for that same hour). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
4 The external node associated with the Delivery Point shall be:  Salisbury 345. 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
NEW YORK INDEPENDENT SYSTEM OPERATOR COORDINATION AGREEMENT 
 
 
 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Coordination 
Agreement 
 
Between 
 
ISO New England Inc. 
 
And 
 
The New York Independent System Operator, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
RECITALS 
ARTICLE 1.0: DEFINITIONS 
ARTICLE 2.0: SCOPE OF AGREEMENT 
ARTICLE 3.0: MUTUAL BENEFITS 
ARTICLE 4.0: INTERCONNECTED OPERATION 
ARTICLE 5.0: EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE 
ARTICLE 6.0: EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION AND CONFIDENTIALITY 
ARTICLE 7.0: COORDINATION COMMITTEE 
ARTICLE 8.0: RELIABILITY COORDINATION AND RELIABILITY ASSESSMENT OF 
OUTAGES 
ARTICLE 9.0: OPERATIONAL INFORMATION 
ARTICLE 10.0: INTERCONNECTION REVENUE METERING 
ARTICLE 11.0: JOINT CHECKOUT PROCEDURES 
ARTICLE 12.0: COORDINATED TRANSACTION SCHEDULING 
ARTICLE 13.0: LIABILITY 
ARTICLE 14.0: APPLICABLE LAW 
ARTICLE 15.0: LICENSE AND AUTHORIZATION 
ARTICLE 16.0: ASSIGNMENT 
ARTICLE 17.0: AMENDMENT 
ARTICLE 18.0: NOTICES 
ARTICLE 19.0: DISPUTE RESOLUTION 
ARTICLE 20.0: REPRESENTATIONS 
ARTICLE 21.0: EFFECTIVE DATE AND TERM 
ARTICLE 22.0: MISCELLANEOUS 
SCHEDULE A:  DESCRIPTION OF INTERCONNECTION FACILITIES 
SCHEDULE B: PROCEDURES FOR DEVELOPMENT AND AUTHORIZATION OF 
OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS 
SCHEDULE C: EMERGENCY ENERGY TRANSACTIONS SCHEDULE 
SCHEDULE D: COORDINATED TRANSACTION SCHEDULING 
 
 
 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
THIS AGREEMENT was made the 1st day of January, 2006, and is hereby restated on the 1st day of 
August, 2017,   
 
BETWEEN: 
 
NEW YORK INDEPENDENT SYSTEM OPERATOR, INC., a not-for-profit corporation 
established under the laws of New York State, hereinafter called the “NYISO”. 
 
And 
 
ISO NEW ENGLAND INC., a not-for-profit, private corporation established under the laws of 
the State of Delaware, hereinafter called “ISO-NE”. 
 
WHEREAS, capitalized terms not otherwise defined herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them in 
Section 1.0 hereof; 
 
WHEREAS, ISO-NE and the NYISO are sometimes hereinafter referred to, collectively, as the “Parties” 
and, individually, as a “Party”; 
 
WHEREAS, the NYISO is an independent, not-for-profit corporation established pursuant to the ISO 
Agreement, responsible for providing transmission service, maintaining the Reliability of the electric 
power system and facilitating efficient markets for capacity, energy and ancillary services in the New 
York Balancing Authority Area in accordance with its filed NYISO Tariffs;  
 
WHEREAS, ISO-NE is a not-for-profit, independent corporation that serves as the RTO for New 
England, in which capacity it operates New England’s wholesale electricity markets, manages a 
comprehensive regional bulk power system planning process and is responsible for the day-to-day reliable 
operation of New England's bulk power system; 
 
WHEREAS, ISO-NE, as RTO for the New England Transmission System and administrator of the New 
England markets, and the NYISO as the ISO for the New York Transmission System, enter into 
coordination agreements and operating arrangements with the operators of neighboring Reliability 
Coordinator Areas and Balancing Authority Areas, and coordinate system operation and Emergency 
procedures with neighboring Reliability Coordinator Areas and Balancing Authority Areas; 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
 
WHEREAS, the NYISO and ISO-NE desire to coordinate interconnected operation to maintain 
Reliability for both of the power systems of New York State and the New England States, recognizing the 
Parties’ desire to maximize interconnected capability under the terms and conditions contained in this 
Agreement; and 
 
WHEREAS, related to the Interconnection Facilities: 
 
A.   
ISO-NE is the Reliability Coordinator, Balancing Authority, Transmission Operator, 
market operator, and Planning Authority for the six New England States and operates and 
is responsible for the secure operation of the New England Transmission System in 
accordance with its Transmission Operating Agreements with New England 
Transmission Owners and in compliance with the FERC-accepted ISO-NE Tariff, and the 
requirements and criteria set forth by NERC or NPCC and, as such, has the power and 
authority to enter into this Agreement and perform its obligations under it;  
 
B.   
NYISO is the Reliability Coordinator, Balancing Authority, Transmission Operator, 
market operator, and Planning Authority for New York State and operates and is 
responsible for the secure operation of the New York Transmission System in accordance 
with its Transmission Operating Agreements with New York Transmission Owners and 
in compliance with the FERC-accepted New York Independent System Operator 
Agreement (“ISO Agreement”), the Agreement Between New York Independent System 
Operator and Transmission Owners (“ISO/TO Agreement”), the Agreement between 
New York Independent System Operator and the New York State Reliability Council 
(“ISO/NYSRC Agreement”), NYISO Tariffs, and the requirements and criteria set forth 
by NERC, NPCC and the NYSRC and, as such, has the power and authority to enter into 
this Agreement and perform its obligations under it; and 
 
C.   
The New England Transmission System and the New York Transmission System 
interconnect by way of the Interconnection Facilities, which are described in Schedule A 
of this Agreement; and 
 
D.   
The Parties wish to record their agreement as to the operational and other matters 
addressed herein and pertaining to the Interconnection Facilities; and 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
 
WHEREAS the Parties desire to manage the operational aspects of their interconnected operations by 
developing, administering and implementing practices, procedures and sharing information relating to 
Reliability coordination and power system operation that will be managed and approved by a committee 
formed under this Agreement; 
 
NOW, THEREFORE, THIS AGREEMENT WITNESSES THAT in consideration of the mutual 
agreements and obligations between the Parties and for other good and valuable consideration ISO-NE 
and the NYISO agree as follows:  
 
ARTICLE 1.0: DEFINITIONS 
 
In this Agreement, the following words and terms shall have the meanings (such meanings to be equally 
applicable to both the singular and the plural forms) ascribed to them in this Article 1.0.   
 
“Adequacy” means the ability of the electric system to supply the aggregate electrical demand and energy 
requirements of the end-use customers at all times, taking into account scheduled and reasonably 
expected unscheduled outages of system elements. 
 
“Agreement” means this Agreement and the Schedule(s) attached hereto and incorporated herein. 
“Balancing Authority” means the responsible entity that integrates resource plans ahead of time, 
maintains load-interchange-generation balance within a Balancing Authority Area, and supports 
Interconnection frequency in real time. 
 
“Balancing Authority Area” means the collection of generation, transmission, and loads within the 
metered boundaries of the Balancing Authority.  The Balancing Authority maintains load-resource 
balance within this area. 
 
“Confidential Information” has the meaning stated in Section 6.5 of this Agreement. 
 
“Confirmed Trust Relationship” means that one Responsible Settlement Party has granted another 
Responsible Settlement Party permission to confirm, modify or withdraw its CTS Interface Bids.  
 
“Control Area” means an electric system or combination of electric power systems to which a common 
automatic generation control scheme is applied in order to: (1) match, at all times, the power output of the 
Generators within the electric power system(s) and capacity and energy purchased from entities outside 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
the electric power system(s), with the Load within the electric power system(s); (2) maintain scheduled 
interchange with other Control Areas, within the limits of Good Utility Practice; (3) maintain the 
frequency of the electric power system(s) within reasonable limits in accordance with Good Utility 
Practice and the criteria of the applicable regional reliability council or the North American Electric 
Reliability Corporation; and (4) provide sufficient capacity to maintain Operating Reserves in accordance 
with Good Utility Practice. 
 
“Coordination Committee” means the jointly constituted ISO-NE and NYISO committee established to 
administer the terms and provisions of this Agreement pursuant to Article 7.0 of this Agreement.  
 
“Coordinated Transaction Scheduling” or “CTS” means an external transaction scheduling process 
between the NYCA and NECA in which Market Participants’ bids, to buy energy in one region and sell in 
another region, are economically and simultaneously cleared by ISO-NE and NYISO.  This process takes 
place pursuant to market rules in the Parties’ respective tariffs that allow transactions to be scheduled over 
a CTS Enabled Interface based on a bidder’s willingness to purchase energy from the NYCA or NECA 
(the source) and sell it to the other Control Area (the sink) if the bid price is less than or equal to the 
expected LMP difference across the interface in the requested direction, as of the time the interface is 
scheduled. 
 
“CTS Enabled External Proxy Bus” shall mean an External Proxy Bus at which the Parties accept CTS 
Interface Bids to schedule external transactions in the real-time energy market. 
 
“CTS Enabled Interface” means an Interconnection at which the Parties accept CTS Interface Bids for all 
import offers, for all export bids, and for wheels through the NECA.  The CTS Enabled Interfaces are 
specified in Section 4.4.4 of the NYISO’s Market Administration and Control Area Services Tariff and in 
Section III.1.10.7.A of the ISO-NE Tariff. 
 
“CTS Interface Bid” means: (1) in ISO-NE, an Interface Bid as defined in the ISO-NE Tariff, and an 
hourly spread bid associated with the wheeling of energy through the NECA, and (2) in NYISO, a CTS 
Interface Bid as defined in the NYISO Tariff. 
 
“Delivery Point” means a point on each of the three Interconnections between the New England 
Balancing Authority Area and the NYISO Balancing Authority Area and such other points of 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
Interconnection as may be established.  Such Delivery Point(s) shall include the Interconnection Facilities 
between ISO-NE and the NYISO.  
 
“Dispute” has the meaning attributed thereto in Article 19.0 of this Agreement. 
 
“Effective Date” means the reference date of this Agreement as shown on the first page of this 
Agreement. 
 
“Emergency” means any abnormal system condition that requires automatic or immediate manual action 
to prevent or limit the failure of transmission facilities or generation supply that could adversely affect the 
Reliability of the Bulk Electric System (as defined by NERC). 
 
“Emergency Energy” means energy supplied from Operating Reserve or electrical generation available 
for sale in New York or New England or available from another Balancing Authority Area.  Emergency 
Energy may be provided in cases of sudden and unforeseen outages of generating units, transmission lines 
or other equipment, or to meet other sudden and unforeseen circumstances such as forecast errors, or to 
provide sufficient Operating Reserve.  Emergency Energy is provided pursuant to this Agreement and 
priced according to Attachment A of Schedule C of this Agreement. 
 
“External Interface Congestion” means the portion of the congestion component of the LMP at an 
External Proxy Bus that is associated with an External Proxy Bus Constraint.   
 
“External Proxy Bus” means a location that is selected to represent an Interconnection with a Party’s 
Control Area for which LMPs are calculated. In NYISO, this is a Proxy Generator Bus as defined in the 
NYISO Services Tariff. In ISO-NE, this is an External Node as defined in the ISO-NE Tariff.  
 
“External Proxy Bus Constraint” has the meaning set forth in Section 4.2 of Schedule D to this 
Agreement.   
 
“FERC” means the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. 
 
“Force Majeure” means an event of force majeure as described in Section 11.1 of this Agreement. 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
“Good Utility Practice” means any of the practices, methods and acts engaged in or approved by a 
significant portion of the North American electric utility industry during the relevant time period, or any 
of the practices, methods and acts which, in the exercise of reasonable judgment in light of the facts 
known at the time the decision was made, could have been expected to accomplish the desired result 
consistent with good business practices, Reliability, safety and expedition. Good Utility Practice is not 
intended to be limited to the optimum practice, method, or act to the exclusion of all others, but rather to 
be acceptable practices, methods, or acts generally accepted by NERC and the FERC. 
 
“Intentional Wrongdoing” means an act or omission taken or omitted by a Party with knowledge or intent 
that injury or damage could reasonably be expected to result.  
 
“Interconnection” means a connection(s) between two or more individual Transmission Systems that have 
interconnecting Intertie(s). 
 
“Interconnection Facilities” means the Interconnections described in Schedule A.  
 
“Interconnection Reliability Operating Limit” or “IROL” means a System Operating Limit that, if 
violated, could lead to instability, uncontrolled separation or Cascading Outages (as defined by NERC) 
that adversely impact the reliability of the Bulk Electric System. 
 
“Intertie” means a transmission line that forms part of an Interconnection. 
 
“ISO” means independent system operator, as designated by FERC. 
 
“ISO Agreement” means the agreement that establishes the NYISO. 
 
“ISO-NE Supply Price Points” means a set of increasing MW and price pairs, as described in Section 3.0 
of Schedule D.  
 
“ISO-NE Tariff” means the ISO New England Inc. Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff, which 
includes the ISO-NE Open Access Transmission Tariff and ISO-NE market rules. 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
“Locational Marginal Price” or “LMP” shall mean the market price for energy at a given location in a 
Party’s Control Area, calculated in accordance with the requirements of the Party’s tariff, and “Locational 
Marginal Pricing” shall mean the processes related to the determination of the LMP.   
 
“Market Participant” means a participant in either the ISO-NE- or NYISO-administered wholesale power 
markets.  Market Participants include transmission service customers, power exchanges, Transmission 
Owners, load serving entities, loads, holders of energy derivatives, generators and other power suppliers 
and their designated agents. 
 
“Metered Quantity” means apparent power, reactive power, active power, with associated time tagging 
and any other quantity that may be measured by a Party’s Metering Equipment and that is reasonably 
required by either Party for Security reasons or revenue requirements. 
 
“Metering Equipment” means the potential transformers, current transformers, meters, interconnecting 
wiring and recorders used to meter any Metered Quantity. 
 
“Mutual Benefits” as described in Article 3.0 of this Agreement, means the transient and steady-state 
support that the integrated generation and transmission facilities in the New England and New York 
Transmission Systems provide to each other inherently by virtue of being interconnected. 
 
“NERC” means the North American Electric Reliability Corporation or the successor organization. 
 
“New England Control Area” or “NECA” is the Control Area for New England as defined in the ISO-NE 
Tariff. 
 
“New England Transmission System” for the purpose of this Agreement means the entire system of 
transmission facilities, within the New England Reliability Coordinator Area and Balancing Authority 
Area that are under ISO-NE’s operational jurisdiction, as defined in Transmission Operating Agreements 
and the ISO-NE Tariff.   
 
“New York Control Area” or “NYCA” means the Control Area that is under the operational control of the 
NYISO, as defined in the NYISO Tariffs. 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
“New York State Reliability Council” or “NYSRC” means the organization that promotes and preserves 
the Reliability of electric service on the New York Transmission System by developing and maintaining 
NYSRC Reliability Rules which are complied with by the NYISO, and for monitoring and assuring 
compliance with such rules. 
 
“New York Transmission System” for the purpose of this Agreement means the “NYS Transmission 
System” as that term is defined in the NYISO OATT.   
 
"NPCC" means the Northeast Power Coordinating Council Inc. or its successor organization. 
 
“NPCC Criteria, Guides and Procedures” are documents, or the successor of these documents, that 
contain the Reliability Standards of the NPCC and which detail the principles of interconnected planning 
and operations that define and direct the efforts of the NPCC and its members.  These documents are 
essential to maintaining the Security, Adequacy, Reliability and efficient operation of the interconnected 
bulk power supply system of NPCC members. 
 
“NYISO Open Access Transmission Tariff” or “NYISO OATT” means the NYISO Open Access 
Transmission Tariff accepted by FERC. 
 
“NYISO Services Tariff” means the NYISO Market Administration and Control Area Services Tariff 
accepted by FERC. 
 
“NYISO Tariffs” means the NYISO OATT and the NYISO Services Tariff, collectively. 
 
“NYSRC Reliability Rules” means the rules applicable to the operation of the New York Transmission 
System by the NYISO.  These rules are based on Reliability Standards adopted by NERC and NPCC, but 
also include more specific and more stringent rules to reflect the particular requirements of the New York 
Transmission System. 
 
“Operating Instructions” means the joint operating procedures, steps, and instructions that are to be 
utilized by both Parties for the operation of the Interconnection Facilities established and modified from 
time to time by the Coordination Committee in accordance with (a) the ISO-NE Tariff and the NYISO 
Tariffs, (b) Schedule B of this Agreement and (c) the ISO-NE and NYISO individual procedures and 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
processes.  Operating Instructions are separate from the ISO-NE and NYISO individual procedures and 
processes. 
 
“Operating Reserve” means: (1) in ISO-NE, an Operating Reserve as defined in Section I.2.2 of the ISO-
NE Tariff, and (2) in NYISO, an Operating Reserve as defined in Section 2.2 of the NYISO Services 
Tariff.  For purposes of Schedule D to this Agreement, 10-minute Operating Reserve is considered a 
higher quality product than 30-minute Operating Reserve. 
 
“Operational Control” for the purpose of this Agreement, means Security monitoring, adjustment of 
generation and transmission resources, coordinating and approval of changes in transmission status for 
maintenance, determination of changes in transmission status for Reliability, coordination with other 
Balancing Authority Areas and Reliability Coordinators, voltage reductions and load shedding, except 
that each legal owner of generation and transmission resources continues to physically operate and 
maintain its own facilities. 
 
“Parties” means ISO-NE and NYISO, and “Party” means either one of them. 
 
“Planning Authority” means the responsible entity that coordinates and integrates transmission facility 
and service plans, resource plans, and protection systems. 
 
“Ramp Limit” means, for purposes of Schedule D to this Agreement, either: (1) the maximum allowable 
amount of change in net interchange at a CTS Enabled Interface over a defined period of time, established 
in accordance with Section 5.1 of Schedule D; or (2) the maximum allowable amount of change in net 
interchange across all NYISO Proxy Generator Buses over a defined period of time, established in 
accordance with the NYISO Tariffs. 
 
“Real-Time Commitment” or “RTC” means the NYISO’s multi-period security constrained unit 
commitment and dispatch model, as defined in the NYISO Tariffs. 
 
“Reliability” means the degree of performance of the bulk electric system that results in electricity being 
delivered within Reliability Standards and in the amount desired. Electric system Reliability can be 
addressed by considering two basic and functional aspects of electric systems, which are Adequacy and 
Security. 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
“Reliability Coordinator” means the entity that is the highest level of authority who is responsible for the 
reliable operation of the Bulk Electric System, has the Wide Area (as defined by NERC) view of the Bulk 
Electric System, and has the operating tools, processes and procedures, including the authority, to prevent 
or mitigate emergency operating situations in both next-day analysis and real-time operations.  The 
Reliability Coordinator has the purview that is broad enough to enable the calculation of Interconnection 
Reliability Operating Limits, which may be based on the operating parameters of transmission systems 
beyond any Transmission Operator’s vision.  
“Reliability Coordinator Area” means the collection of generation, transmission, and loads within the 
boundaries of the Reliability Coordinator.  Its boundary coincides with one or more Balancing Authority 
Areas. 
 
“Reliability Standards” means the criteria, standards and requirements relating to Reliability established 
by a Standards Authority. 
 
“Responsible Settlement Party” or “RSP” means a Market Participant that is responsible for the financial 
settlement of one or more transactions at a CTS Enabled Interface, as determined in accordance with the 
requirements of the Parties’ respective tariffs that address the settlement of external transactions at CTS 
Enabled Interfaces. 
 
“RTO” means a regional transmission organization, as designated by FERC. 
 
“Schedule” means a schedule attached to this Agreement and all amendments, attachments, supplements, 
replacements and/or additions thereto. 
 
“Security” means the ability of the electric system to withstand sudden disturbances including, without 
limitation, electric short circuits or unanticipated loss of system elements. 
 
“Standards Authority” means NERC, NPCC, NYSRC or any other agency with authority over either 
Party regarding standards or criteria relating to the Reliability of Transmission Systems. 
 
“System Operating Limit” means the value (such as MW, MVar, Amperes, Frequency or Volts) that 
satisfies the most limiting of the prescribed operating criteria for a specified system configuration to 
ensure operation within acceptable Reliability criteria.  System Operating Limits are based upon certain 
operating criteria.  These include, but are not limited to the following NERC-defined ratings or limits: 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
Facility Ratings (applicable pre- and post-Contingency equipment or facility ratings); Transient Stability 
Ratings (applicable pre- and post-Contingency Stability Limits); Voltage Stability Ratings (applicable 
pre- and post-Contingency Voltage Stability); and System Voltage Limits (applicable pre- and post-
Contingency Voltage Limits). 
 
“Third Party” means a person or entity that is not a Party to this Agreement.  
 
“Transfer Limit” means the minimum or maximum net interchange that can be scheduled on a CTS 
Enabled Interface and is established in accordance with Section 5.0 of Schedule D. 
 
“Transmission Operating Agreement(s)” means the respective agreements that establish the terms and 
conditions under which the Transmission Owners transferred to the NYISO and ISO-NE Operational 
Control over the Interconnection Facilities.  For the NYISO, these agreements are the ISO Agreement, the 
ISO/TO Agreement, and the ISO/NYSRC Agreement.  For ISO-NE, this is the Transmission Operating 
Agreement, which provides operating authority over certain Interconnection Facilities (i.e., the NY/NE 
Northern AC Interconnection and the NNC Interconnection), and Attachment K to Section II of the ISO-
NE Tariff, which provides operating authority over other Interconnection Facilities (i.e., the CSC 
Interconnection). 
 
“Transmission Operator” means the entity responsible for the Reliability of its “local” transmission 
system, and that operates or directs the operations of the transmission facilities in accordance with 
applicable Transmission Operating Agreements. 
 
“Transmission Owner” means the entity that owns and maintains transmission facilities. 
 
“Transmission System” means a system for transmitting electricity, and includes any structures, 
equipment or other facilities used for that purpose. 
 
ARTICLE 2.0: SCOPE OF AGREEMENT 
 
2.1 Restatement of Prior Agreement 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
The terms of the prior agreement made between the Parties dated January 1, 2006, are hereby amended, 
restated and superseded by the terms of this Agreement, to be effective on the Effective Date of this 
Agreement. 
 
2.2 Purpose of This Agreement 
 
This Agreement provides for the reliable operation of the interconnected New England and New York 
Transmission Systems in accordance with the requirements of the Standards Authority.  
 
This Agreement establishes a structure and framework for the following functions related to the 
Reliability of interconnected operations between the Parties: 
 
(a) 
developing and issuing Operating Instructions and System Operating Limits; 
(b) 
coordinating operation of their respective Transmission Systems; 
(c) 
developing and adopting operating criteria and standards; 
(d) 
conducting operating performance reviews of the Interconnection Facilities; 
(e) 
considering matters related to transmission service and access; 
(f) 
implementing each Party’s respective NERC and NPCC requirements with regard to the 
New England Transmission System and New York Transmission System; 
(g) 
exchanging operations information regarding the Interconnection; 
(h) 
exchanging information and coordinating regarding system planning;  
(i) 
providing mutual assistance in an Emergency and during system restoration;  
(j) 
administering Coordinated Transaction Scheduling; and  
(k) 
implementing other arrangements between the Parties for the coordination of their 
systems. 
 
The Parties shall, consistent with NPCC Criteria, Guides and Procedures and the Parties’ respective 
tariffs, rules and standards, including with respect to the NYISO, the NYSRC Reliability Rules, to the 
maximum extent they deem consistent with the safe and proper operation of their respective Reliability 
Coordinator Area and Balancing Authority Area and necessary coordination with other interconnected 
systems, and with the furnishing of dependable and satisfactory service to their own customers, operate 
their systems in accordance with the following procedures and principles.   
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
ARTICLE 3.0: MUTUAL BENEFITS 
 
3.1 No Charge for Mutual Benefits of Interconnection 
 
Both the New England Transmission System and New York Transmission System, by virtue of being 
connected to each other and with a much larger Interconnection, share Mutual Benefits such as transient 
and steady-state support.  NYISO and ISO-NE shall not charge one another for such Mutual Benefits. 
 
3.2 Maintenance of Mutual Benefits 
 
The Parties shall endeavor to operate or direct the operation of the Interconnection Facilities to realize the 
Mutual Benefits.  The Parties recognize circumstances beyond their control, such as a result of operating 
configurations, contingencies, maintenance, or actions by Third Parties, may result in a reduction of 
Mutual Benefits.  
 
ARTICLE 4.0: INTERCONNECTED OPERATION 
 
4.1 Obligation to Remain Interconnected 
 
The Parties shall at all times during the term of this Agreement operate or direct the operation of their 
respective Transmission Systems so that they remain interconnected except: 
(a) 
during the occurrence of an event of Force Majeure which renders a Party unable to 
remain interconnected; 
(b) 
when an Interconnection is opened in accordance with the terms of an Operating 
Instruction; 
(c) 
when an Interconnection is opened in accordance with Good Utility Practice in a 
particular circumstance where there is an imminent risk of equipment failure, or of 
danger to personnel or the public, or a risk to the environment, or risk to  the Reliability 
of a Transmission System that is not anticipated and addressed within an Operating 
Instruction; or 
(d) 
during planned maintenance where notice has been given in accordance with outage 
procedures as implemented by the Coordination Committee.  
 
4.2 Adherence to NPCC Criteria, Guides and Procedures 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
 
The Parties are participants in the NPCC and are required to comply with NPCC Criteria, Guides and 
Procedures.  Such NPCC Criteria, Guides and Procedures detail the many coordinating functions carried 
out by the Parties and this Agreement is intended to enhance this arrangement.  Such NPCC Criteria 
include, and the Parties agree to comply with, “Emergency Operation Criteria” (Document A-3), which 
describes the basic factors to be considered by a Reliability Coordinator and Balancing Authority in 
formulating plans and procedures to be followed in an Emergency.  A principle of operation in this NPCC 
Criterion is that upon receiving a request for assistance to avoid or mitigate an Emergency, a Balancing 
Authority Area would provide “maximum reasonable assistance” to a neighboring Balancing Authority 
Area.  Such reasonable assistance would not normally require the shedding of firm load. 
 
4.3 Notification of Circumstances 
 
In the event that a component of the Interconnection Facilities is opened or if the transfer capability of a 
component of the Interconnection Facilities is changed, or if a Party plans to initiate the opening of any 
component of the Interconnection Facilities, or to change the transfer capability of any component of the 
Interconnection Facilities, such Party shall immediately provide the other Party with notification 
indicating the circumstances of the opening or transfer capability change and expected restoration time, in 
accordance with procedures implemented by the Coordination Committee or applicable NPCC Criteria, 
Guides and Procedures. 
 
4.4 Compliance with Coordination Committee Direction. 
 
ISO-NE shall direct the operation of the New England Transmission System and the NYISO shall direct 
the operation of the New York Transmission System in accordance with the obligations of their respective 
tariffs, rules and standards and applicable directions of the Coordination Committee that conform with 
their respective tariffs, rules and standards, including with respect to the NYISO, the NYSRC Reliability 
Rules, except where prevented by Force Majeure.  The Coordination Committee direction includes 
decisions and jointly developed and approved Operating Instructions.  If decisions or Operating 
Instructions of the Coordination Committee do not anticipate a particular circumstance, the Parties shall 
act in accordance with Good Utility Practice. 
 
4.5 Control and Monitoring 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
Each Party shall provide or arrange for 24-hour control and monitoring of their portion of the 
Interconnection Facilities. 
 
4.6 Reactive Transfer and Voltage Control 
 
The Parties agree to determine reactive transfers and control voltages in accordance with the provisions of 
NPCC “Guidelines for Inter-Area Voltage Control” (Document B-03). Real and reactive power will be 
transferred over the Interconnection Facilities, which are described in Schedule A of this Agreement. 
 
4.7 Inadvertent  
 
Inadvertent power transfers on all Interconnection Facilities shall be controlled and accounted for in 
accordance with the standards and procedures developed by NERC and NPCC and implemented by the 
Coordination Committee and the system operators of each Party to this Agreement. 
 
4.8 Adoption of Standards  
 
The Parties hereby agree to adopt, enforce and comply with requirements and standards that will 
safeguard Reliability of the interconnected Transmission Systems.  Such Reliability requirements and 
Reliability Standards shall be: 
 
(a) 
adopted and enforced for the purpose of providing reliable service;  
(b) 
not unduly discriminatory in substance or application; 
(c) 
applied consistently to both Parties (with the exception of subsection (e) below); 
(d) 
consistent with the Parties’ respective obligations to applicable Standards Authorities  
including, without limitation, any relevant requirements or guidelines from each of 
NERC, NPCC or any other Standards Authority to which the Parties are required to 
adhere; and  
(e) 
with respect to the NYISO, consistent with the NYSRC Reliability Rules. 
 
4.9 New York - New England IROL Interface 
 
The Parties share a joint Interconnection Reliability Operating Limit (“IROL”) related to transfers on the 
interconnecting transmission lines between their respective Reliability Coordinator Areas and Balancing 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
Authority Areas.  This IROL is adhered to in order to ensure acceptable steady-state and transient 
performance of the New York and New England Transmission Systems.  Both Parties will monitor this 
limit in accordance with this Agreement and independently determine the applicable import and export 
transfer limits.  Both Parties agree to operate the interface to the most conservative limits developed in 
real-time and the day-ahead planning process.  These operating limits shall be determined in accordance 
with NERC Reliability Standards and NPCC Criteria, Guides and Procedures.  Both Parties will take 
coordinated corrective actions to avoid a violation of the IROL.  If a violation occurs, coordinated 
corrective actions shall be taken to ensure that the violation is cleared as soon as possible, and in 
accordance with NERC Reliability Standards. 
 
4.10 Coordination and Exchange of Information Regarding System Planning 
 
Each Party shall have operating procedures, processes or plans in place for activities that require 
notification, exchange of information or coordination of actions with the other Party to support 
Interconnection reliability.  Each Party shall have communications capabilities with the other Party, for 
both voice and data exchange as required to meet reliability needs of the Interconnection. 
 
The Parties shall exchange information and coordinate regarding system operations and planning and 
inter-regional planning activities in a manner consistent with NERC and NPCC requirements, and 
consistent with the requirements of Section 6 of this Coordination Agreement. 
 
ARTICLE 5.0: EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE 
 
5.1 Emergency Assistance  
 
Both Parties shall exercise due diligence to avoid or mitigate an Emergency to the extent practicable as 
per each Party’s requirements related to the mitigation of an Emergency, in applicable policies and 
procedures imposed by NERC, NPCC, or (for the NYISO) the NYSRC, or contained in the ISO-NE 
Tariff and NYISO Tariffs.  In avoiding or mitigating an Emergency, both Parties shall strive to allow for 
commercial remedies, but if commercial remedies are not successful, the Parties agree to be the suppliers 
of last resort to ensure Reliability on the system. For each hour during which Emergency conditions exist 
in a Party’s Balancing Authority Area, that Party (while still ensuring operations within applicable 
Reliability Standards) shall determine what commercial remedies are available and make use of those that 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
are available and needed to avoid or mitigate the Emergency before any Emergency Energy is scheduled 
in that hour.  
 
5.2 Emergency Energy Transactions 
 
Each Party shall, to the maximum extent it deems consistent with the safe and proper operation of its 
respective Transmission System, provide Emergency Energy to the other Party in accordance with the 
provisions of Schedule C of this Agreement. 
 
ARTICLE 6.0: EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION AND CONFIDENTIALITY 
 
ISO-NE and NYISO are authorized and agree to exchange and share such information as is required for 
the Coordination Committee to perform its duties and for the Parties to fulfill their obligations under this 
Agreement.   Any Party that receives Confidential Information or Critical Energy Infrastructure 
Information (“CEII”) pursuant to this Article 6 (the “Receiving Party”) shall treat such information as 
confidential subject to the terms and conditions set forth in Section 6.5 of this Agreement.  
 
6.1 Information   
 
Parties are authorized and agree to share the following information: 
 
(a) 
Information required to develop Operating Instructions; 
(b) 
Transmission System facility specifications and modeling data required to perform 
Security analysis; 
(c) 
Functional descriptions and schematic diagrams of Transmission System protective 
devices and communication facilities; 
(d) 
Ratings data and associated ratings methodologies for the Interconnection Facilities; 
(e) 
Telemetry points, equipment alarms and status points required for real-time monitoring of 
Security dispatch; 
(f) 
Data required to reconcile accounts for inadvertent energy, and for Emergency Energy 
transactions; 
(g) 
Transmission System information that is consistent with the information sharing 
requirements imposed by the NERC and NPCC;  
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
(h) 
Such other information as may be required for the Parties to maintain the reliable 
operation of their interconnected Transmission Systems and fulfill their obligations under 
this Agreement and to any Standards Authority of which either Party is a member, 
provided, however, that this other information will be exchanged only if it can be done in 
accordance with applicable restrictions on the disclosure of information to any Market 
Participant; and 
(i) 
Information related to the administration of CTS including: 
• 
ISO-NE Market Participant user and organization information; 
• 
ISO-NE Supply Price Points for each CTS Enabled Interface; 
• 
ISO-NE Transfer Limits for each CTS Enabled Interface; 
• 
NYISO and ISO-NE Operating Reserves and reserve requirements; 
• 
Day-ahead schedules, and real-time actual output and limits for NYCA generators that 
have capacity obligations in the ISO-NE market and for NECA generators that have 
capacity obligations in the NYISO market;   
• 
Real-time bids, including real-time bids to wheel energy, submitted at a CTS Enabled 
Interface between the NYCA and the NECA (to be provided by NYISO); 
• 
NYISO Day Ahead Operating Plan; and  
• 
NYISO RTC results, including cleared MWs for all bids at a CTS Enabled Interface 
between the NYCA and the NECA, as well as LMPs, Transfer Limits and constraint 
information related to the scheduling of real-time energy transactions between the 
NYCA and the NECA. 
 
6.2 Data Exchange Contact 
 
To facilitate the exchange of all such data, each Party will designate to the other Party’s Vice President in 
charge of operations a contact(s), plus one or more alternate contacts, to be available twenty-four (24) 
hours each day, seven (7) days per week to respond to data inquiries.  An alternate contact of each Party 
shall be its Operations Control Room.  Each Party shall provide the name, telephone number, e-mail 
address, and fax number of each contact and alternate.  Each Party may change the designated contact by 
notifying the other Party’s Vice President in charge of operations in advance of the change. 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
 
The Parties agree to exchange data in a timely manner consistent with existing defined formats or such 
other formats to which the Parties may agree.  Each Party shall provide notification to the other Party 
thirty (30) days prior to modifying an established data exchange format. 
 
6.3 Cost of Data and Information Exchange 
 
Each Party shall bear its own cost of providing information to the other Party.  
 
6.4 Other Data 
 
The Parties may share Confidential Information not listed in this Article 6 that is necessary for the 
coordinated operation of their systems, subject to the protections set forth in Section 6.5, below.  
 
6.5 Treatment of Confidential Information and Critical Energy Infrastructure Information 
 
(a) 
Definitions.  For purposes of addressing information shared or exchanged pursuant to this 
Agreement, the term “Confidential Information” shall mean:  (i) all information, whether 
furnished before or after the mutual execution of this Agreement, whether oral, written or 
recorded/electronic, and regardless of the manner in which it is furnished, that is marked 
“confidential” or “proprietary” or which under all of the circumstances should be treated 
as confidential or proprietary; (ii)  information that is Confidential Information or 
Strategic Information under the ISO New England Information Policy or the NYISO 
Code of Conduct; (iii) information that is Protected Information under the NYISO Market 
Monitoring Plan; (iv) all reports, summaries, compilations, analyses, notes or other 
information of a Party hereto which are based on, contain or reflect any Confidential 
Information; or (v) any information which, if disclosed by a transmission function 
employee of a utility regulated by the FERC to a market function employee of the same 
utility system, other than by public posting, would violate the FERC’s Standards of 
Conduct set forth in 18 C.F.R. § 37 et. seq. and the Parties’ Standards of Conduct on file 
with the FERC. 
 
(b) 
Labeling of Confidential Information.  In circumstances where it may not be clear that 
information that is provided or exchanged between the Parties pursuant to the authority 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
provided in this Agreement is Confidential Information, the information being provided 
should be clearly marked “confidential” or “proprietary.”  Such labeling is not required 
for the regular, automated exchange of Confidential Information that occurs, for example, 
to permit the Parties to administer CTS.  
 
(c) 
Protection.  Except as set forth herein, the Receiving Party shall not, at any time during or 
after the term of this Agreement, in any manner, either directly or indirectly, divulge, 
disclose, or communicate to any person, firm, corporation or other entity, or use for any 
purposes other than those set forth herein, any Confidential Information acquired from 
the party disclosing the information (the “Disclosing Party”), without the express prior 
written consent of the Disclosing Party.  The Receiving Party shall not disclose any 
Confidential Information to anyone except to officers and employees of the Receiving 
Party and to its outside consultants, advisers and/or attorneys, in each case who have a 
need to know to further the purposes set forth herein and who have been advised of the 
confidential nature of the Confidential Information and who have agreed to abide by the 
terms of this Agreement or are bound by equally restrictive covenants (collectively, 
“Authorized Representatives”).  The Receiving Party agrees that it shall be liable for any 
breach of this Agreement by its Authorized Representatives. 
 
 (d) 
Survival.  The obligation of each Party and each Authorized Representative under this 
Article 6 continues and survives the termination of this Agreement. 
 
(e) 
Scope.  This obligation of confidentiality shall not extend to data and information that, at 
no fault of the Receiving Party, is or becomes: (a) in the public domain or generally 
available or known to the public; (b) disclosed to a recipient by a non-Party who had a 
legal right to do so; or (c) independently developed by the Receiving Party or known to 
such Party prior to its disclosure hereunder. 
 
(f) 
Required Disclosure or Submission on a Confidential Basis.  If a governmental authority 
requests or requires the Receiving Party to publicly disclose any of the Disclosing Party’s 
Confidential Information, or if a request from another person or entity is made in writing 
pursuant to a legal discovery process, the Receiving Party shall provide the Disclosing 
Party with prompt notice of such request or requirement. The Disclosing Party shall in 
turn, to the extent required by the terms of its tariff, provide any Market Participant 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
whose Confidential Information is the subject of possible disclosure with prompt written 
notice of the circumstances that may require such disclosure so that the Market 
Participant has a reasonable opportunity to seek a protective order or other appropriate 
remedy to prevent disclosure. 
 
If a Receiving Party is required to publicly disclose any Confidential Information under 
this Section, the Parties shall meet as soon as practicable in an effort to resolve any and 
all issues associated with the required disclosure , and the possibility of further requested 
or required disclosures of the Disclosing Party’s Confidential Information. 
 
The process described above shall also be followed if a governmental authority requests 
or requires the Receiving Party to submit any of the Disclosing Party’s Confidential 
Information on a confidential basis (with the exception of requests for Confidential 
Information from FERC or the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (“CFTC”) to 
the NYISO).  The Receiving Party shall notify the governmental authority that the 
requested or required information contains NYISO or ISO-NE Market Participant 
specific Confidential Information, if applicable, and shall use reasonable efforts to protect 
the Confidential Information from public disclosure.   
 
If FERC or the CFTC request or require the NYISO to submit any Confidential 
Information it received from ISO-NE on a confidential basis, the NYISO will seek 
permission to inform ISO-NE of the requirement or request and, if granted, will follow 
the procedures outlined above.  In the event FERC or the CFTC does not permit the 
NYISO to notify ISO-NE of the request, NYISO shall inform FERC or the CFTC in 
writing that the disclosed information includes Confidential Information, and shall 
request that FERC or the CFTC inform NYISO before releasing to a third party any of 
the Confidential Information. 
 
If a governmental authority (including FERC and the CFTC) that requested or required 
the submission, on a confidential basis, of Confidential Information by a Receiving Party 
issues a notice indicating that it is considering disclosing, or intends to disclose any 
Confidential Information provided by the Disclosing Party, or if the governmental 
authority (including FERC and the CFTC) receives a public records demand or other 
legal discovery request seeking disclosure of any Confidential Information provided by 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
the Disclosing Party, the Receiving Party shall notify the Disclosing Party so that the 
Disclosing Party may seek an appropriate protective order or other appropriate remedy.  
The Disclosing Party shall in turn, to the extent required by the terms of its tariff, provide 
any Market Participant whose Confidential Information is the subject of possible 
disclosure under this provision with prompt written notice of the circumstances that may 
require such disclosure so that the Market Participant has a reasonable opportunity to 
seek a protective order or other appropriate remedy to prevent disclosure. 
 
 (g) 
Return of Confidential Information.  Information provided pursuant to this Section 6 is 
deemed to be on loan, and remains the property of the Disclosing Party notwithstanding 
the disclosure of such Confidential Information to the Receiving Party hereunder.  All 
Confidential Information provided by the Disclosing Party shall be returned by the 
Receiving Party to the Disclosing Party or destroyed, erased or deleted by the Receiving 
Party, with written confirmation provided to the Disclosing Party, promptly upon request.  
Upon termination of this Agreement, a Party shall use reasonable efforts to destroy, erase, 
delete or return to the Disclosing Party any and all written or electronic Confidential 
Information. Unless otherwise expressly agreed in a separate license agreement, the 
disclosure of Confidential Information to the Receiving Party will not be deemed to 
constitute a grant, by implication or otherwise, of a right or license to the Confidential 
Information or in any patents or patent applications of the Disclosing Party. 
 
(h) 
Relief.  Each Party acknowledges that remedies at law are inadequate to protect against 
breach of the covenants and agreements in this Article, and hereby in advance agrees, 
without prejudice to any rights to judicial relief that it may otherwise have, to the 
granting of equitable relief, including injunction, in the Disclosing Party’s favor without 
proof of actual damages.  In addition to the equitable relief referred to in this Section, a 
Disclosing Party shall only be entitled to recover from a Receiving Party any and all 
gains wrongfully acquired, directly or indirectly, from a Receiving Party’s unauthorized 
disclosure of Confidential Information. 
 
 
(i) 
Existing Confidential Information Obligations.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
in this Agreement, the Parties shall have no obligation to disclose Confidential 
Information or data to the extent such disclosure of information or data would be a 
violation of or inconsistent with applicable state or federal regulation or law.  This 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
Agreement requires the Parties to exchange Confidential Information that is necessary for 
the Coordination Committee to perform its duties, or for the Parties to fulfill their 
obligations under this Agreement.  The Parties are not obligated to share Confidential 
Information for other purposes. 
 
(j) 
The term “CEII” or “Critical Energy Infrastructure Information” shall mean all 
information, whether furnished before or after the mutual execution of this Agreement, 
whether oral, written or recorded/electronic, and regardless of the manner in which it is 
furnished, that is marked “CEII” or “Critical Energy Infrastructure Information” or which 
under all of the circumstances should be treated as such in accordance with the definition 
of CEII in 18 C.F.R. § 388.13(c)(1).  The Receiving Party shall maintain all CEII in a 
secure place.  The Receiving Party shall treat CEII received under this agreement in 
accordance with its own procedures for protecting CEII and shall not disclose CEII to 
anyone except its Authorized Representatives. 
 
6.6 Unauthorized Transfer of Third-Party Intellectual Property 
 
In the performance of this Agreement, no Party shall transfer to the other Party any Intellectual Property, 
the use of which by the other Party would constitute an infringement of the rights of another entity 
(including the Parties).  In the event such transfer occurs, whether or not inadvertent, the transferring 
Party shall, promptly upon learning of the transfer, provide Notice to the receiving Party and upon receipt 
of such Notice the receiving Party shall take reasonable steps to avoid claims and mitigate losses.   
 
ARTICLE 7.0: COORDINATION COMMITTEE 
 
7.1 Coordination Committee Inauguration and Authorization 
 
The Parties shall form a Coordination Committee under this Agreement.  Within 30 days of the Effective 
Date, each of the Parties shall appoint two representatives, a principal and an alternate, to serve as 
members of the Coordination Committee with the authority to act on their behalf with respect to actions 
or decisions taken by the Coordination Committee.  A Party may, at any time upon providing prior notice 
to the other Party, designate a replacement principal member or alternate member to the Coordination 
Committee. 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
7.2 Coordination Committee Duties and Responsibilities 
 
The Coordination Committee exists to administer or assist the Parties’ implementation of the provisions 
of this Agreement.  The Coordination Committee shall develop and adopt policies, instructions, and 
recommendations relating to the Parties' performance of their obligations under this Agreement, attempt 
to resolve Disputes between the Parties pursuant to Article 17.0 of this Agreement, and shall undertake 
any other actions specifically delegated to it pursuant to this Agreement. 
 
The Coordination Committee shall undertake to assist the Parties’ efforts to jointly develop Operating 
Instructions to implement the intent of this Agreement in accordance with Schedule B of this Agreement, 
‘Procedures for Development and Authorization of Operating Instructions’.  The Coordination Committee 
shall authorize such Operating Instructions once developed.  To the extent that the Operating Instructions 
require participation by local control centers and Transmission Owners in the New England or the New 
York Reliability Coordinator Areas, those entities will be involved in the development process. 
 
Should the terms and conditions contained in this Agreement be found to conflict with or fail to recognize 
obligations of a Standards Authority of which either Party is a member or other regulatory requirements, 
the Parties agree to amend this Agreement accordingly.  
 
Any recommendations on revisions to this Agreement shall be provided to each Party’s appropriate 
corporate officers for approval. 
 
7.3 Limitations of Coordination Committee Authority 
 
The Coordination Committee is not authorized to modify or amend any of the terms of this Agreement.  
The Coordination Committee is also not authorized to excuse any obligations under this Agreement or 
waive any rights pertaining to this Agreement.  
 
The Coordination Committee has no authority to commit either Party to any expenditure that is beyond 
those expenses described herein.  
 
7.4 Exercise of Coordination Committee Duties 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
The Coordination Committee shall hold meetings no less frequently than once each calendar year.  The 
matters to be addressed at all meetings shall be specified in an agenda, which shall contain items specified 
by either Party in advance of the meeting and sent to the representatives of the other Party.  All decisions 
of the Coordination Committee must be unanimous. Special meetings may be called at any time if the 
Coordination Committee deems such meetings to be necessary or appropriate. 
Subject to the limitations on its authority as described in Section 7.3 of this Agreement, the Coordination 
Committee has the responsibility and authority to take action on all aspects of this Agreement, including, 
but not limited to the following:  
 
(a) 
amending, adding or canceling Operating Instructions and providing written notice in 
accordance with Article 18.0 of this Agreement;  
(b) 
assessment of non-compliance with this Agreement and, subject to Article 19.0 of this 
Agreement, the taking of appropriate action in respect thereof; 
(c) 
documentation of decisions related to the initial resolution of Disputes as set out in 
Article 19.0 of this Agreement, or in cases of unresolved Disputes, the circumstances 
relevant to the Dispute in question as contemplated by the requirements of Article 19.0 of 
this Agreement; and 
(d) 
preparation, documentation, retention and distribution of Coordination Committee 
meeting minutes and agendas. 
 
ARTICLE 8.0: RELIABILITY COORDINATION AND RELIABILITY  
ASSESSMENT OF OUTAGES 
 
Both Parties agree to provide each other with updates on planned outage schedules and other activities in 
accordance with NPCC Criteria, Guides and Procedures that may impact on the Reliability or availability 
of the interconnected New York Transmission System and New England Transmission System.  As 
Reliability Coordinators and Balancing Authorities, the NYISO and ISO-NE, shall interact with each 
other as required, and with other Balancing Authorities and Reliability Coordinators, to establish System 
Operating Limits and to perform Reliability coordination and Reliability assessments of outages. 
 
ARTICLE 9.0: OPERATIONAL INFORMATION 
 
9.1 Obligation to Provide Operational Data and Status Points 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
The Parties shall ensure that appropriate monitoring facilities are installed as required to provide for 
electric power quantities or equipment loading to enable monitoring of System Operating Limits, meet 
requirements of each of NERC and NPCC, and for determining Interconnection Facilities inadvertent 
energy accounting.  
 
ARTICLE 10.0: INTERCONNECTION REVENUE METERING 
 
10.1 Obligation to Provide Inadvertent Energy Accounting Metering  
 
The Parties shall ensure appropriate electric metering devices are installed as required to measure electric 
power quantities for determining Interconnection Facilities inadvertent energy accounting.  
 
10.2 Standards for Metering Equipment  
 
Any Metering Equipment used to meter Metered Quantities for inadvertent energy accounting shall be 
designed, verified, sealed and maintained in accordance with the Party’s respective metering standards or 
as otherwise agreed to by the Coordination Committee. 
 
10.3 Meter Compensation to the Point of Interconnection 
 
The metering compensation for transmission line losses to the Interconnection Facilities Delivery Point 
shall be determined by the Party’s respective standards or otherwise agreed to by the Coordination 
Committee. 
 
10.4 Metering Readings 
 
The Parties shall ensure that integrated meter readings are provided at least once each hour for 
Interconnection Facilities accounting purposes and meter registers are read at least monthly, as close as 
practicable to the last hour of the month.  An appropriate adjustment shall be made to register readings 
not taken on the last hour of the month.  
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
ARTICLE 11.0:  JOINT CHECKOUT PROCEDURES 
11.1 Scheduling Checkout Protocols 
Both Parties shall require all real-time energy market transaction schedules over Interconnections to be 
tagged in accord with the NERC tagging standard.  For Simultaneous Activation of Reserves (“SAR”) 
and other emergency schedules that are not tagged, the Parties will enter manual schedules into their 
respective operating systems.  
 
When there is a real-time energy market transaction scheduling conflict, the Parties will work to modify 
the schedule as soon as practical.   
 
Consistent with the foregoing requirements, the Parties will perform the following types of checkouts: 
 
(a) Day-ahead checkout shall be performed daily on the day before the transaction is to flow.  Day-
ahead checkout includes the verification of net interchange totals and individual transaction 
schedules;  
 
(b) Real-time checkout shall be performed during the period before the transaction is to flow.  Real-
time checkout includes the verification of net interchange totals and individual transaction 
schedules; 
 
(c) After-the-fact checkout of real-time transactions shall be performed the next business day 
following the day of the transactions; 
 
(d) After-the-fact reporting of scheduled energy interchange and actual energy interchange shall be 
updated by each Party each day and exchanged with the other Party.  Within ten (10) business 
days of the end of each month, the previous month’s data shall be reconciled.   
 
ARTICLE 12.0: COORDINATED TRANSACTION SCHEDULING 
 
CTS is addressed in Schedule D to this Agreement and in the ISO-NE and NYISO Tariffs. 
 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
ARTICLE 13.0: LIABILITY 
 
13.1 Force Majeure 
 
A Party shall not be considered to be in default or breach of this Agreement, and shall be excused from 
performance or liability for damages to the other Party, if and to the extent it shall be delayed in or 
prevented from performing or carrying out any of the provisions of this Agreement, arising out of or from 
any act, omission, or circumstance by or in consequence of any act of God, labor disturbance, sabotage, 
failure of contractors or suppliers of materials, act of the public enemy, war, invasion, insurrection, riot, 
fire, storm, flood, ice, earthquake, explosion, epidemic, breakage or accident to machinery or equipment 
or any other cause or causes beyond such Party’s reasonable control, including any curtailment, order, 
regulation, or restriction imposed by governmental, military or lawfully established civilian authorities, or 
by making of repairs necessitated by an emergency circumstance not limited to those listed above upon 
the property or equipment of the Party or property or equipment of others which is deemed under the 
Operational Control of the Party.  A Force Majeure event does not include an act of negligence or 
Intentional Wrongdoing by a Party.  Any Party claiming a Force Majeure event shall use reasonable 
diligence to remove the condition that prevents performance and shall not be entitled to suspend 
performance of its obligations in any greater scope or for any longer duration than is required by the 
Force Majeure event.  Each Party shall use its best efforts to mitigate the effects of such Force Majeure 
event, remedy its inability to perform, and resume full performance of its obligations hereunder. 
 
A Party suffering a Force Majeure event (“Affected Party”) shall notify the other Party (“Non-Affected 
Party”) in writing (“Notice of Force Majeure Event”) as soon as reasonably practicable specifying the 
cause of the event, the scope of commitments under the Agreement affected by the event, and a good faith 
estimate of the time required to restore full performance.  Except for those commitments identified in the 
Notice of Force Majeure Event, the Affected Party shall not be relieved of its responsibility to fully 
perform as to all other commitments in the Agreement.  If the Force Majeure event continues for a period 
of more than 90 days from the date of the Notice of Force Majeure Event, the Non-Affected Party shall be 
entitled, at its sole discretion, to terminate the Agreement. 
 
13.2 Liability to Third Parties 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
Nothing in this Agreement, whether express or implied, is intended to confer any rights or remedies under 
or by reason of this Agreement on any person or entity that is not a Party or a permitted successor or 
assign. 
 
13.3 Indemnification 
 
(a) 
Definitions. An “Indemnifying Party” means a Party who holds an indemnification 
obligation hereunder.  An “Indemnitee” means a Party entitled to receive indemnification 
under this Agreement. 
(b) 
Third Party Losses. Each Party will defend, indemnify, and hold the other Party harmless 
from all losses, damages, liabilities, obligations, claims, demands, suits, proceedings, 
recoveries, settlements, costs and expenses, court costs, attorney fees, causes of action, 
judgments and other obligations (collectively, “Losses”) brought or obtained by any 
Third Party against such other Party, only to the extent that such Losses arise directly 
from the: 
 
(i) 
Gross negligence, recklessness, or willful misconduct of the Indemnifying Party 
or any of its agents or employees, in the performance of this Agreement; except 
to the extent such Losses arise (i) from gross negligence, recklessness, willful 
misconduct or breach of contract or law by the Indemnitee or such Indemnitee’s 
agents or employees, or (ii) as a consequence of strict liability imposed as a 
matter of law upon the Indemnitee, or such Indemnitee’s agents or employees; or 
 
(ii) 
Breach of the Parties’ obligations in Article 6 hereof. 
 
(c) 
Process. The Indemnitee shall give Notice to the Indemnifying Party as soon as 
reasonably practicable after the Indemnitee becomes aware of the indemnifiable Losses 
or any claim, action or proceeding that may give rise to an indemnification.  Such notice 
shall describe the nature of the Losses or proceeding in reasonable detail, explain how the 
Losses relate to the performance of this Agreement, and shall indicate, if practicable, the 
estimated amount of the Losses that has been sustained by the Indemnitee.  A delay or 
failure of the Indemnitee to provide the required notice shall release the Indemnifying 
Party (i) from any indemnification obligation to the extent that such delay or failure 
materially and adversely affects the Indemnifying Party’s ability to defend such claim or 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
materially and adversely increases the amount of the indemnifiable Losses, and (ii) from 
any responsibility for any costs or expenses of the Indemnitee in the defense of the claim 
during such period of delay or failure. 
 
(d) 
Indemnification shall be limited to the extent that the liability of the Indemnitee would be 
limited by any applicable law. 
 
13.4 Liability Between the Parties 
 
The Parties’ duties and standard of care with respect to each other, and the benefits and rights conferred 
on each other shall be no greater than as expressly stated herein.  Neither Party, its directors, officers, 
trustees, employees or agents, shall be liable to the other Party for any Losses, whether direct, indirect, 
incidental, punitive, special, exemplary or consequential, arising from that Party’s performance or 
nonperformance under this Agreement, except to the extent that the Party, is found liable for gross 
negligence or willful misconduct, in which case the Party responsible shall be liable only for direct and 
ordinary damages and not for any incidental, consequential, punitive, special, exemplary or indirect 
damages. 
 
This section shall not limit amounts required to be paid for Emergency Energy under Schedule C to this 
Agreement.  This section shall not apply to adjustments or corrections for errors in invoiced amounts due 
under Schedule C to this Agreement. 
 
13.5 Liability for Interruptions 
 
Except as set forth herein, neither Party shall be liable to the other Party for any Losses or damage, 
whether direct, indirect, incidental, punitive, special, exemplary or consequential, resulting from an 
occurrence on the circuits and system that are under the Operational Control of the other Party and which 
results in damage to or renders inoperative such circuits and system, or the separation of the systems in an 
Emergency, or interrupts or diminishes service, or increases, decreases or in any way affects for whatever 
length of time the voltage or frequency of the energy delivered hereunder to the other Party. 
 
ARTICLE 14.0: APPLICABLE LAW 
 
This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Delaware.  
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
 
ARTICLE 15.0: LICENSE AND AUTHORIZATION 
 
The agreements and obligations expressed herein are subject to such initial and continuing governmental 
permission and authorization as may be required.  Each Party shall be responsible for securing and paying 
for any approvals required by it from any regulatory agency of competent jurisdiction relating to its 
participation in this Agreement and will reasonably cooperate with the other Party in seeking such 
approvals.  
 
ARTICLE 16.0: ASSIGNMENT 
 
This Agreement shall inure to the benefit of, and be binding upon and may be performed by, the 
successors and assigns of the Parties hereto respectively, but shall not be assignable by either Party 
without the written consent of the other.  
 
ARTICLE 17.0: AMENDMENT 
 
17.1 Review of Agreement 
 
The terms of this Agreement are subject to review for potential amendment at the request of either Party.  
If, consequent to such review, the Parties agree that any of the provisions hereof, or the practices or 
conduct of either Party impose an inequity, hardship or undue burden upon the other Party, or if the 
Parties agree that any of the provisions of this Agreement have become obsolete or inconsistent with 
changes related to the Interconnection Facilities, the Parties shall endeavor in good faith to amend or 
supplement this Agreement in such a manner as will remove such inequity, hardship or undue burden, or 
otherwise appropriately address the cause for such change. 
 
Any amendment of this Agreement by the Parties must be done in accordance with Section 17.2. 
 
17.2 Authorized Representatives 
 
No amendment of this Agreement shall be effective unless effected by written instrument duly executed 
by the Parties’ authorized representatives.  For the purposes of this Section, an authorized person refers to 
individuals designated as such by Parties in their respective corporate by-laws. 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
 
ARTICLE 18.0: NOTICES 
 
Except as otherwise agreed from time to time, any notice, invoice or other communication which is 
required by this Agreement to be given in writing, shall be sufficiently given at the earlier of the time of 
actual receipt or deemed time of receipt if delivered personally to a senior official of the Party for whom 
it is intended or electronically transferred or sent by registered mail, addressed as follows: 
 
In the case of the NYISO to: 
 
New York Independent System Operator, Inc. 
10 Krey Boulevard, Rensselaer, New York 12144 
Attention: Vice President of Operations 
 
In the case of ISO-NE to: 
 
ISO New England Inc. 
One Sullivan Road 
Holyoke, Massachusetts 01040-2841 
Attention: Vice President of System Operations 
 
or delivered to such other person or electronically transferred or sent by registered mail to such other 
address as either Party may designate for itself by notice given in accordance with this Section or 
delivered by any other means agreed to by the Parties hereto. 
 
Any notice, or communication so mailed shall be deemed to have been received on the third business day 
following the day of mailing, or if electronically transferred shall be deemed to have been received on the 
same business day as the date of the electronic transfer, or if delivered personally shall be deemed to have 
been received on the date of delivery or if delivered by some other means shall be deemed to have been 
received as agreed to by the Parties hereto. 
 
The use of a signed facsimile of notices and correspondence between the Parties related to this Agreement 
shall be accepted as proof of the matters therein set out.  Follow-up with hard copy by mail will not be 
required unless agreed to by the Coordination Committee. 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
 
ARTICLE 19.0: DISPUTE RESOLUTION 
 
In the event of a dispute arising out of or relating to this Agreement (a “Dispute”) that is not resolved by 
the representatives of the Parties who have been designated under Section 7.1 of this Agreement within 7 
days of the reference to such representatives of such Dispute, each Party shall, within 14 days’ written 
notice by either Party to the other, designate a senior officer with authority and responsibility to resolve 
the Dispute and refer the Dispute to them.  The senior officer designated by each Party shall have 
authority to make decisions on its behalf with respect to that Party’s rights and obligations under this 
Agreement.  The senior officers, once designated, shall promptly begin discussions in a good faith effort 
to agree upon a resolution of the Dispute.  If the senior officers do not agree upon a resolution of the 
Dispute within 30 days of its referral to them (or within such longer period as the senior officers mutually 
agree to in writing), or do not mutually agree to submit their Dispute for binding or non-binding 
arbitration by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission’s Dispute Resolution Service, then the Parties 
shall request that the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission’s Dispute Resolution Service mediate their 
efforts to resolve the Dispute.  At any point in the mediation process, either Party may terminate the 
mediation and may pursue any and all remedies available to it at law or in equity.  
 
Neither the giving of notice of a Dispute, nor the pendency of any Dispute resolution process as described 
in this Section shall relieve a Party of its obligations under this Agreement, extend any notice period 
described in this Agreement or extend any period in which a Party must act as described in this 
Agreement.  Notwithstanding the requirements of this Section, either Party may terminate this Agreement 
in accordance with its provisions, or pursuant to an order of FERC or a court at equity.  The issue of 
whether such a termination is proper shall not be considered a Dispute hereunder.   
 
ARTICLE 20.0: REPRESENTATIONS 
 
20.1 Good Standing 
 
Each Party represents and warrants that it is duly organized, validly existing and in good standing under 
the laws of the state in which it is organized, formed, or incorporated, as applicable. 
 
20.2 Authority to Enter Into Agreement  
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
Each Party represents and warrants that it has the right, power and authority to enter into this Agreement, 
to become a Party hereto and to perform its obligations hereunder.  This Agreement is a legal, valid and 
binding obligation of such Party, enforceable against such Party in accordance with its terms. 
 
20.3 Organizational Formation Documents 
 
Each Party represents and warrants that the execution, delivery and performance of this Agreement does 
not violate or conflict with the organizational or formation documents, bylaws, operating agreement, or 
agency agreement of such Party, or any judgment, license, permit, regulatory order, or governmental 
authorization applicable to such Party. 
 
20.4 Regulatory Authorizations 
 
Each Party represents and warrants that it has, or applied for, all regulatory authorizations necessary for it 
to perform its obligations under this Agreement. 
 
ARTICLE 21.0: EFFECTIVE DATE AND TERM 
 
Subject to the conditions of Article 13.0 (License and Authorization) above, this Agreement shall take 
effect as of the date that all of the following have occurred: (i) upon the execution hereof by both Parties 
on the date set forth above; and (ii) acceptance or approval by the FERC.  This Agreement shall continue 
in force until terminated in accordance with this Article. 
This Agreement may be terminated at any time by mutual agreement in writing.  It may also be 
terminated by either Party with prior written notice of at least ninety (90) days to the other Party of its 
intention to terminate. 
 
ARTICLE 22.0: MISCELLANEOUS 
 
22.1 Performance 
 
The failure of a Party to insist, on any occasion, upon strict performance of any provision of this 
Agreement will not be considered a waiver of any right held by such Party.  Any waiver on any specific 
occasion by either Party shall not be deemed a continuing waiver of such right, nor shall it be deemed a 
waiver of any other right under this Agreement. 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
 
22.2 Agreement 
 
This Agreement, including all Schedules and Attachments hereto, is the entire agreement between the 
Parties with respect to the subject matter hereof, and supersedes all prior or contemporaneous 
understandings or agreements, oral or written, with respect to the subject matter of this Agreement. 
 
22.3 Governmental Authorizations 
 
This Agreement, including its future amendments is subject to the initial and continuing Federal Energy 
Regulatory Commission authorizations required to establish, operate and maintain the Interconnection 
Facilities as herein specified.  Each Party shall take all actions necessary and reasonably within its control 
to maintain all rights and Federal Energy Regulatory Commission approvals required to perform its 
respective obligations under this Agreement. 
 
If one Party determines that it is required to self-report a potential violation to the Commission’s Office of 
Enforcement regarding its compliance with this Agreement or the administration of CTS, the reporting 
Party shall inform, and provide a copy of the self-report to the other Party.  Any such report provided by 
one Party to the other shall be Confidential Information.  Each Party shall make reasonable efforts to 
cooperate and assist in remedying any such violation, to the extent such assistance is necessary to resolve 
the matter and to the extent doing so is consistent with maintaining the Party’s legal privilege. 
 
22.4 Unenforceable Provisions 
 
If any provision of this Agreement is deemed unenforceable, the rest of the Agreement shall remain in 
effect and the Parties shall negotiate in good faith and seek to agree upon a substitute provision that will 
achieve the original intent of the Parties. 
 
22.5 Execution 
 
This Agreement may be executed in multiple counterparts, each of which shall be considered an original 
instrument, but all of which shall be considered one and the same Agreement, and shall become binding 
when all counterparts have been signed by each of the Parties and delivered to each Party hereto.  
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
Delivery of an executed signature page counterpart by telecopier shall be as effective as delivery of a 
manually executed counterpart. 
 
22.6 Regulatory Authority 
 
If any Regulatory Authority having jurisdiction (or any successor boards or agencies), a court of 
competent jurisdiction or other governmental entity with the appropriate jurisdiction (collectively, the 
''Regulatory Bodies'') issues a rule, regulation, law or order that has the effect of cancelling, changing or 
superseding any term or provision of this Agreement, including changes to section headings or numbering 
(the ''Regulatory Requirement''), then this Agreement will be deemed modified to the extent necessary to 
comply with the Regulatory Requirement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Regulatory Authority 
materially modifies the terms and conditions of this Agreement and such modification(s) materially affect 
the benefits flowing to one or both of the Parties, as determined by either of the Parties within twenty (20) 
business days of the receipt of the Agreement as materially modified, the Parties agree to attempt in good 
faith to negotiate an amendment or amendments to this Agreement or take other appropriate action(s) so 
as to put each Party in effectively the same position in which the Parties would have been had such 
modification not been made.  In the event that, within sixty (60) days or some other time period mutually 
agreed upon by the Parties after such modification has been made, the Parties are unable to reach 
agreement as to what, if any, amendments are necessary and fail to take other appropriate action to put  
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
each Party in effectively the same position in which the Parties would have been had such modification 
not been made, then either Party shall have the right to unilaterally terminate this Agreement forthwith. 
 
22.7 Headings 
 
 
The headings used for the Articles and Sections of this Agreement are for convenience and reference 
purposes only, and shall not be construed to modify, expand, limit, or restrict the provisions of this 
Agreement. 
 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF 
 
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the Parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be executed in duplicate 
as of the day and year first written above. 
 
 
 
 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
Schedule A:  Description of Interconnection Facilities 
 
The Coordination Agreement between ISO-NE and the NYISO covers the New England – NYISO 
Interconnection Facilities under the Operational Control of the NYISO and ISO-NE. 
 
ISO-NE and NYISO shall jointly develop and maintain an ‘ISO-NE / NYISO List of Interconnection 
Facilities’ (including a description of the associated Interties and metering points) and post the most 
current mutually agreed upon list on their respective public websites. The Parties may jointly revise the 
list by mutual written agreement. After the Parties mutually agree to changes, ISO-NE and NYISO shall 
post an updated list on their respective websites. The ISO-NE / NYISO List of Interconnection Facilities 
shall not be modified if either Party objects to a proposed change. The most current list developed by 
mutual agreement shall remain the official version of the list and neither Party shall knowingly post a list 
that includes changes that are not the product of mutual agreement.  
 
There are three (3) ISO-NE/NYISO Interconnections: the “NY/NE Northern AC Interconnection,” the 
Northport-Norwalk Harbor Cable (“NNC Interconnection”), and the Cross Sound Cable (“CSC 
Interconnection”). For each Interconnection, NYISO and ISO-NE have identified respective associated 
Interties, Intertie metering points, and external nodes for scheduling and pricing purposes.  
 
For Operational Control purposes, the point of demarcation for each of the Interconnections is the point at 
which the Interconnection (and its individual Interties) crosses the New England-New York State 
boundary, except as otherwise noted in the ISO-NE / NYISO List of Interconnection Facilities. The 
external nodes associated with each of the Interconnections are listed in Table 1 of Attachment A of 
Schedule C of this Agreement.  
 
 
 
 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
SCHEDULE B:  Procedures For Development And Authorization 
Of Operating Instructions 
 
 
Overview 
 
Operating Instructions (a) will be developed and recorded by the Parties, with assistance from the 
Coordination Committee, in accordance with this Schedule B, (b) will be contained in a document 
separate from this Agreement, and (c) may be modified by the Parties, with assistance from the 
Coordination Committee, without amending this Agreement. 
 
The Parties, with assistance from the Coordination Committee, shall jointly develop Operating 
Instructions and review them at least annually. The Parties, with assistance from the Coordination 
Committee, shall submit draft material to one another for review and comment. The Parties, with 
assistance from the Coordination Committee, shall provide comment on the draft material promptly. The 
Parties, with assistance from the Coordination Committee, shall promptly provide such information as 
may reasonably be required in connection with establishing, or reviewing, the material.  The Coordination 
Committee shall be responsible for approving final versions of Operating Instructions. 
 
In the event that any conflicts arise or are made apparent to a Party regarding any Operating Instructions, 
they shall notify the other Party and engage the Coordination Committee, if necessary, to resolve such 
conflicts. 
 
The Coordination Committee will periodically review applicable ISO-NE and NYISO individual 
procedures and processes to determine any benefits of sharing these procedures and processes.  These 
benefits may be for the purpose of training or to satisfy Reliability Standards.  The Coordination 
Committee will determine how best to share these individual procedures and processes. 
 
A list of Operating Instructions and applicable ISO-NE and NYISO individual procedures will be 
maintained by the Coordination Committee. 
 
Outlined below are the key principles and items of methodology to be observed while the Parties, with 
assistance from the Coordination Committee, are engaged in developing Operating Instructions, and 
issuing them to their respective operations staff. 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
 
Principles 
 
Given that the Parties’ respective operations staff benefit from following a single instruction for all 
aspects of their execution of interconnected operations, it is an acceptable practice to combine this content 
to achieve the single Operating Instructions for use by a respective Party’s operations staff.  The preferred 
methodology when appropriate is to use the NPCC Criteria, Guides and Procedures for the coordination 
and operation of the interconnected Transmission Systems.  When the NPCC documentation is 
insufficient to accomplish this task separate instructions will be developed in accordance with this 
Schedule. 
 
Each Party shall coordinate the issuance internally of any Operating Instructions developed and agreed to 
by the Parties, with assistance from the Coordination Committee, to ensure that their respective 
operations staff has these Operating Instructions.  In addition annual review of the Operating Instructions 
and the Parties’ internal procedures associated with the Operating Instructions shall be conducted by the 
Parties, with assistance from the Coordination Committee, to ensure consistency.    
 
Operating Instructions, when approved by the Parties, shall be binding on the Parties insofar as they relate 
to the Interconnection Facilities until they expire, are changed, deleted, or superseded by authority of the 
Parties, with assistance from the Coordination Committee. 
 
Items of Methodology 
 
   
By mutual agreement of the Coordination Committee, one of the Parties shall be designated by the 
Coordination Committee to control the revision process of the Operating Instruction from the initial 
drafting of material through to the conversion of the Operating Instruction into its final form. 
 
 
 
 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
SCHEDULE C:  Emergency Energy Transactions Schedule 
 
WHEREAS, ISO-NE, as the regional transmission organization for the New England Transmission 
System and the administrator of the New England markets, arranges for the sale and purchase of 
Emergency capacity and energy on behalf of Market Participants with neighboring Balancing Authority 
Areas, all in accordance with the ISO-NE Tariff, which includes the Open Access Transmission Tariff 
and ISO-NE market rules; 
 
WHEREAS, ISO-NE is responsible for, among other matters, procuring and acting as supplier of last 
resort of ancillary services (including arranging for the sale and purchase of Emergency capacity and 
energy with neighboring Balancing Authority Areas), in accordance with the ISO-NE Tariff; 
 
WHEREAS, the NYISO, as the independent system operator of the New York Transmission System and 
the administrator of the New York wholesale electricity markets, arranges for the sale and purchase of 
Emergency capacity and energy on behalf of Market Participants with neighboring Balancing Authority 
Areas, all in accordance with the NYISO Tariffs;  
 
WHEREAS, the NYISO is the administrator of the NYISO Tariffs and is responsible for, among other 
matters, procuring and acting as supplier of last resort of ancillary services (including arranging for the 
sale and purchase of Emergency capacity and energy with neighboring Balancing Authority Areas), in 
accordance with the NYISO Tariffs; 
 
WHEREAS, either of the Parties may, from time to time, have insufficient Operating Reserve available 
on the respective systems that they operate, or need to supplement available resources to cover sudden 
and unforeseen circumstances such as loss of equipment or forecast errors, and such conditions could 
result in the need to arrange for the purchase of Emergency Energy for Reliability reasons; 
 
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the premises and of the mutual covenants herein set forth, the 
Parties mutually agree as follows: 
 
ARTICLE I 
 
1.0 
DELIVERY POINT 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
The Delivery Point for energy delivered pursuant to the terms of this Schedule shall be at one of three 
points of Interconnection between the NYISO Balancing Authority Area and the ISO-NE Balancing 
Authority Area, and at such other points of Interconnection as may be established.  These three points of 
Interconnection are as follows: (1) the NY/NE Northern AC Interconnection1; (2) the NNC 
Interconnection; and (3) the Cross Sound Cable (CSC) Interconnection, which is a HVDC facility.  
 
Unless otherwise agreed by the Coordination Committee, the price for energy for an hour delivered 
pursuant to this Schedule shall include all transmission costs of delivering such energy to the Delivery 
Point in that hour, and the Party taking delivery of such energy for the hour shall be responsible for all 
transmission costs beyond the Delivery Point for that hour. 
 
ARTICLE II 
 
2.0 
CHARACTERISTICS OF EMERGENCY ENERGY 
 
2.1 
All Emergency Energy made available under this Schedule shall be three phase, 60 Hz alternating 
current at operating voltages established at the Delivery Point in accordance with system requirements 
and appropriate to the Interconnection Facilities or other such characteristics as may be agreed upon by 
the Parties.  
 
ARTICLE III 
 
3.0 
NATURE OF SERVICE 
 
3.1 
ISO-NE and the NYISO shall, to the maximum extent each deems consistent with the safe and 
proper operation of its system, the furnishing of economical, dependable and satisfactory services by its 
participants, and the obligations of its participants to other parties, make available to the other Party when 
a system Emergency exists on the other Party's system, Emergency Energy from its system's available 
generating capability in excess of the system’s load requirements (i.e., load requirements alone, not load 
plus reserve requirements) up to the transfer limits in use between the two Balancing Authority Areas.  
Emergency Energy is provided in cases of emergency outages of generating units, transmission lines or 
other equipment, or to meet other sudden and unforeseen circumstances such as forecast errors, or to 
                                                           
1 The NY/NE Northern AC Interconnection, as defined in Schedule A – Interconnection Facilities (“Schedule A”) to 
the Coordination Agreement between ISO-NE Inc. and the NYISO Inc. 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
provide sufficient Operating Reserve.  Normally, a Party requests Emergency Energy from the other Party 
as a last resort, when market-based real-time energy transactions are not available, or not available in a 
timely fashion in order to maintain its ten-minute reserve requirement.  At the time the Emergency 
Energy sale is being initiated, the Party delivering such Emergency Energy shall describe the Emergency 
Energy transaction as being one of the following: (1) “delivered out of ten-minute reserve”; (2) “delivered 
out of thirty-minute reserve” where such a delivery could reasonably be expected to be recalled if the 
Party delivering the Emergency Energy needed the generation for a reserve pick-up or other Emergency; 
or (3) “delivered above and beyond ten-minute and thirty-minute reserves” where the Party delivering 
such Emergency Energy is normally expected to be able to continue delivering the energy following a 
reserve pick-up. 
 
3.2 
The Parties are participants in the NPCC and are expected to comply with NPCC Criteria, Guides 
and Procedures.  Such NPCC Criteria, Guides and Procedures include “Emergency Operation Criteria” 
(Document A-3), which describes the basic factors to be considered by a Balancing Authority Area in 
formulating plans and procedures to be followed in an Emergency.  A principle of operation in this NPCC 
Criteria is that upon receiving a request for assistance to mitigate an Emergency, a Balancing Authority 
Area would provide “maximum reasonable assistance” to a neighboring Balancing Authority Area.  Such 
reasonable assistance would not normally require the shedding of firm load. 
 
3.3 
Normally, the Party experiencing or anticipating an Emergency would request Emergency Energy 
from the other Party in accordance with this Schedule and applicable NPCC Criteria, Guides and 
Procedures after all market-based real-time transactions have been scheduled, unless there is an 
immediate need for such Emergency Energy in order to maintain system Reliability. 
 
3.4 
In the event a Party is unable to provide Emergency Energy to the other when needed, but there is 
energy available from a Third Party Balancing Authority Area supplier, the Party will use reasonable 
efforts to acquire and transmit such energy to the other Party where feasible. 
 
ARTICLE IV 
 
4.0 
RATES AND CHARGES 
 
4.1 
The charge for Emergency Energy delivered to the NYISO or to ISO-NE shall be as set forth in 
Attachment A, attached hereto. 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
 
4.2 
Should activations of reserve sharing be required by either of the Parties, inadvertent interchanges 
will intentionally be accumulated with each Balancing Authority Area providing assistance. In 
accordance with the NPCC “Procedures for Shared Activation of Ten Minute Reserve” (Document C-12), 
such inadvertent accumulations shall be treated as part of ordinary inadvertent energy. 
 
ARTICLE V 
 
5.0 
MEASUREMENT OF ENERGY INTERCHANGED 
 
5.1 
All energy supplied at the Delivery Point shall be metered.  The metered amounts shall be 
adjusted for actual losses to the Delivery Point on each of the Interconnection Facilities.   This adjustment 
will be done to compensate for the difference in location between the Delivery Point and the meter. 
 
5.2 
Any properly designated representative of either of the Parties hereto shall have access, through 
coordination with the meter owner, during normal business hours, to all of the billing meters for the 
purpose of reading the same.  The accuracy of the meters shall be verified by proper tests periodically and 
at any other time upon reasonable notice given by either of the Parties to the other, and each of the Parties 
shall be entitled to have a representative present at such verification, subject to coordination with the 
meter owner.  In the event errors greater than +/-2% should be discovered, retroactive billing adjustments, 
if any, shall be determined by the Coordination Committee. 
 
ARTICLE VI 
 
6.0 
BILLING AND PAYMENT 
 
6.1 
The procedure for rendering and payment of invoices for transactions pursuant to this Schedule 
shall be as set out hereunder unless otherwise agreed by the Coordination Committee. 
 
6.2 
The Party delivering energy pursuant to this Schedule shall promptly prepare, or cause to be 
prepared, and render an invoice to the other Party covering all transactions conducted under the terms of 
this Schedule.  All transactions will be billed based on the schedule of energy agreed to by the Parties.   
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
6.3 
All invoices rendered by a Party shall be payable by the other Party in currency of the United 
States of America by electronic bank transfer within five (5) business days after the issuance of an invoice 
(the “Due Date”). 
 
6.4 
If the rendering of an invoice is unavoidably delayed, a Party may issue an interim invoice based 
on estimated charges.  Each invoice shall be subject to adjustment for any errors in calculation, meter 
readings, estimating or otherwise.  Any such billing adjustments shall be made as promptly as practical, 
but in no event later than six months after issuing the invoice. 
 
6.5 
Any amount not paid by the Due Date shall be subject to interest, calculated from the due date of 
the invoice to the date of payment, in accordance with the methodology specified for interest on refunds 
in the FERC’s regulations at 18 C.F.R. § 35.19a (a) (2) (iii). 
 
6.6 
If any invoice remains unpaid by a Party for thirty (30) days after the Due Date, the Party 
rendering the invoice may, in addition to all other remedies available to it, and after giving the other Party 
at least five days written notice of the its intention to do so, present the issue in question to that Party’s 
Board of Directors.  The Party’s Board of Directors shall contact the other Party’s Board of Directors or 
its designee to develop a solution to a billing Dispute pursuant to Article 17 of this Agreement.  The 
Boards of Directors may also choose to submit the billing Dispute to a form of alternative Dispute 
resolution to which the Boards of Directors may agree.  Such action shall not be construed as a breach of 
contract by the Party rendering the invoice and shall not relieve the other Party of its obligations to pay 
for energy in accordance with the provisions of this Schedule. 
 
6.7 
The applicable provisions of this Schedule shall continue in effect after termination of this 
Schedule to the extent necessary to provide for final billing, billing adjustments, payments and disposition 
of any claims outstanding. 
 
6.8 
Each Party warrants that it has, or will have, the agreements and procedures in place to ensure the 
collection of payments from its participants for the delivery of Emergency Energy to it from the other 
Party. 
 
ARTICLE VII 
 
7.0 
RECORDS 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
 
7.1 
Each Party hereto shall keep or cause to be kept complete and accurate records and memoranda of 
its operations hereunder and shall maintain such data as may be necessary to determine with reasonable 
accuracy any item required hereunder.  With respect to invoicing records, each Party shall maintain or 
cause to be maintained such records, memoranda and data for the current calendar year plus the previous 
calendar year.  The Coordination Committee shall have the right to examine all such records and 
memoranda that are not confidential in so far as may be reasonably necessary for the purpose of 
ascertaining the reasonableness and accuracy of any statements of costs relating to transactions hereunder. 
 
 
 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
Attachment A 
 
To the Emergency Energy Transactions Schedule 
 
Emergency Energy Pricing 
 
In accordance with the Emergency Energy Transactions Schedule between the NYISO and ISO-NE, the 
charge for Emergency Energy delivered to the Delivery Point by the NYISO or ISO-NE to the other shall 
be as defined within this Attachment A. 
 
A.1. 
Direct NYISO/ISO-NE Emergency Energy Transaction 
 
These are requests made by either the NYISO or ISO-NE to receive Emergency Energy in support of 
Emergency conditions and to protect Reliability in the event that there is a need for energy on its system 
that could not be supplied through the market. 
 
The charge for Emergency Energy shall be calculated using the following two-part formula.  The first part 
of the formula calculates the Energy Charge portion of the charge and the second part incorporates any 
Transmission Charge reasonably associated with the delivery of the Emergency Energy to the Delivery 
Point. 
 
The Energy Charge portion of the Emergency Energy Charge (for an hour) 
 
For NYISO as the delivering Party: 
The Energy Charge portion of the Emergency Energy Charge for an hour equals the sum of the Energy 
Charges for each real-time interval in the hour.  The Energy Charge for each real-time interval = 
(Emergency Energy supplied in the real-time interval in megawatthour(s) (“MWh”)) 
* 
(Delivering Party’s Cost of Energy in $/MWh) 
* 
110% 
 
The Cost of Energy shall be the NYISO final real-time Locational Based Marginal Price 
(“LBMP”) at the external node associated with the Delivery Point (as used in the NYISO market 
system for energy exports from the NYISO Balancing Authority Area into the New England 
Balancing Authority Area, as such pricing node is defined in NYISO Tariffs and as summarized 
in Table 1), for the real-time interval of the Emergency Energy delivery.  For purposes of this 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
calculation, a real-time LBMP for an interval is set to $0.00 if the real-time LBMP in that interval 
was negative. 
 
 
 
For ISO-NE as the delivering Party: 
 
The Energy Charge portion of the Emergency Energy Charge for an hour equals the sum of the Energy 
Charges for each five minute settlement interval in the hour * 110%.  For purposes of this calculation: 
(1) 
The Energy Charge for a five-minute settlement interval equals the amount of Emergency 
Energy (in MWh) scheduled in the settlement interval at the external node associated 
with the Delivery Point (as used in the New England market system for energy exports 
from the New England Balancing Authority Area into the NYISO Balancing Authority 
Area), adjusted for any curtailment, multiplied by the Cost of Emergency Energy in the 
settlement interval. 
(2) 
The Cost of Emergency Energy in a five-minute settlement interval equals the LMP at the 
external node associated with the Delivery Point for the settlement interval.  
 
For purposes of this calculation, an LMP in a settlement interval is set to $0.00 if the LMP in the 
settlement interval was negative. 
 
Table 1 
 
Delivery Points and Associated Pricing Nodes, as Modeled by the Delivering Party 
 
 
External Nodes for Pricing Node for the Delivering Party 
(as modeled in the Delivering Party’s system) 
 
Delivery Point 
Delivering Party: 
ISO-NE 
Delivering Party: 
NYISO 
NY/NE Northern AC 
Interconnection 
 
(excludes the NNC (or 1385 
Cable) Intertie) 
 
.I.ROSETON 345 1 (4011) 
N.E._GEN_SANDY PD 
(24062) 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
NNC Interconnection 
.I.NRTHPORT 1385 (4017) 
NPX_1385_GEN (323591) 
 
CSC Interconnection 
.I.SHOREHAM 138 99 
9(4014) 
NPX_GEN_CSC (323557) 
 
The Transmission Charge portion of the Emergency Energy Charge (for an hour) 
 
The Transmission charge portion of the Emergency Energy Charge to the Delivery Point for an hour shall 
equal the actual ancillary services costs and any transmission costs reasonably associated with the 
delivery of such Emergency Energy for an hour by the delivering Party to the Delivery Point pursuant to 
the applicable tariff of the delivering Party, as filed with and accepted by the governmental agency with 
jurisdiction over such tariff. 
 
A.2. 
NYISO/ISO-NE Emergency Energy Transaction From Third Party Balancing Authority 
Area Supplier 
 
These are requests made by NYISO or ISO-NE to deliver Energy to the other to address system balancing 
or other Reliability conditions present on the exporting system, which could not be accomplished through 
the market. 
 
The charge for Emergency Energy supplied to a Party from a Third Party Balancing Authority Area 
supplier shall be calculated using the following two-part formula.  The first part of the formula calculates 
the Energy Charge portion of the charge, which in this case includes the total charge (energy and 
transmission) that the Third Party Balancing Authority Area supplier charges for delivery of the 
Emergency Energy to the delivering Party’s Balancing Authority Area border.  The second part of the 
formula incorporates any Transmission Charges reasonably associated with the delivery of the Emergency 
Energy by the delivering Party through its system to the Delivery Point.    It is expected that that all such 
Third Party Balancing Authority Area supplier charges will be in accordance with rates filed and accepted 
by the governmental body with jurisdiction over such rates.  
 
The Energy Charge portion of the Emergency Energy Charge (for an hour) 
 
The Energy Charge portion of the Emergency Energy Charge for an hour = 
       (Emergency Energy supplied in the hour in MWh) 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
       * (Third Party Balancing Authority Area supplier’s total charge for such energy in $/MWh) 
 
(Note: 10% adder does not apply to pricing of Emergency Energy from Third Party Balancing Authority 
Area suppliers.)   
 
The Transmission Charge portion of the Emergency Energy Charge (for an hour) 
 
The Transmission Charge portion of the Emergency Energy Charge to the Delivery Point for an hour shall 
equal the actual ancillary services costs and any transmission costs reasonably associated with the 
delivery of such energy for an hour to the Delivery Point pursuant to the applicable tariff of the delivering 
Party, as filed with and accepted by the governmental agency with jurisdiction over such tariff.  
Transmission costs would include, but not be limited to, any costs for congestion and losses that are 
associated with the delivery of such Emergency Energy through the delivering Party’s Balancing 
Authority Area for an hour to the Delivery Point, as calculated by the amount of Emergency Energy 
supplied multiplied by: (1) when NYISO is the delivering Party, (the NYISO real-time LBMP of the 
external node at which the Emergency Energy exits the NYISO Balancing Authority Area minus the 
NYISO real-time LBMP of the external node at which the Emergency Energy enters the NYISO 
Balancing Authority Area); or (2) when ISO-NE is the delivering Party, (the ISO-NE real-time LMP of 
the external node at which the Emergency Energy exits the ISO-NE Balancing Authority Area minus the 
ISO-NE real-time LMP of the external node at which the Emergency Energy enters the ISO-NE 
Balancing Authority Area). 
 
 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
 
 
 
 
Schedule D: Coordinated Transaction Scheduling 
 
 
WHEREAS, ISO-NE, as the regional transmission organization for the New England Transmission 
System and the administrator of the New England wholesale electricity markets, schedules the sale of 
energy by its Market Participants to, and the purchase of energy by its Market Participants from, 
neighboring Balancing Authority Areas, all in accordance with the ISO-NE Tariff, which includes the 
Open Access Transmission Tariff and ISO-NE market rules; 
 
WHEREAS, ISO-NE is the administrator of the ISO-NE Tariff and is responsible for, among other 
matters, ensuring sufficient reserves are available to provide reliable service in its Balancing Authority 
Area, in accordance with the ISO-NE Tariff; 
 
WHEREAS, the NYISO, as the independent system operator of the New York Transmission System and 
the administrator of the New York wholesale electricity markets, schedules the sale of energy by its 
Market Participants to, and the purchase of energy by its Market Participants from, neighboring Balancing 
Authority Areas, all in accordance with the NYISO Tariffs;  
 
WHEREAS, the NYISO is the administrator of the NYISO Tariffs and is responsible for, among other 
matters, ensuring sufficient reserves are available to provide reliable service in its Balancing Authority 
Area, in accordance with the NYISO Tariffs; 
 
WHEREAS, Coordinated Transaction Scheduling will improve interregional scheduling efficiency by 
taking into account relative price differences between the regions and scheduling bids and offers on a 15 
minute basis at CTS Enabled Interfaces; and 
 
WHEREAS, the Parties desire to schedule energy between their Balancing Authority Areas more 
efficiently, while continuing to ensure that each Party will maintain sufficient Operating Reserve 
available on its respective system to ensure the reliable operation thereof; 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
 
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the premises and of the mutual covenants herein set forth, the 
Parties mutually agree as follows: 
 
 
 
ARTICLE I 
 
1.0 
OVERVIEW OF COORDINATED TRANSACTION SCHEDULING 
 
Coordinated Transaction Scheduling or “CTS” is an external transaction scheduling process 
implemented by the Parties at designated CTS Enabled Interfaces that allow real-time energy transactions 
to be scheduled based on a Market Participant’s willingness to purchase energy at a source External Proxy 
Bus (in the NECA, or in the NYCA) and sell it at a sink External Proxy Bus in the other Control Area if 
the forecasted price at the sink minus the forecasted price at the corresponding source is greater than or 
equal to the bid price.  The rules set forth in this Schedule D only apply at CTS Enabled Interfaces. 
 
In accordance with the terms of this Schedule D and the Parties’ respective tariffs, CTS Interface Bids 
are ordinarily evaluated on a 15-minute basis utilizing forecasted real-time prices and forecasted system 
information from NYISO and forecasted real-time prices and forecasted system information from ISO-
NE.  The evaluation will be performed by the NYISO’s Real-Time Commitment (RTC) optimization 
consistent with the rules specified in the NYISO Services Tariff and this Schedule D. 
 
As part of the iterative CTS process, NYISO will share forward looking RTC interchange schedules 
with ISO-NE and these schedules will be used by ISO-NE as an input to develop a new set of forecasted 
prices and system information, which ISO-NE will then provide to NYISO for use in the next RTC 
optimization. 
 
In accordance with Section 4 below, the RTC optimization will determine the External Interface 
Congestion component of the RTC LMP at a CTS Enabled Interface, which will subsequently be 
incorporated into the Parties’ real-time settlement LMPs.   
 
Wheel-through transactions across a CTS Enabled Interface will be scheduled on an hourly basis.  
Wheels through the NYCA will use decremental or sink price cap bids at CTS Enabled Interfaces.  
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
Wheels through the NECA will use hourly CTS Interface Bids at CTS Enabled Interfaces for scheduling 
by the NYISO.   
 
 
The Parties agree that CTS and its components will operate in accordance with this Schedule D and 
the terms of the Parties’ respective tariffs. 
 
 
ARTICLE II 
 
2.0 
SUBMITTAL OF CTS INTERFACE BIDS 
 
2.1 
CTS Interface Bid Submittal by New England Responsible Settlement Parties and their 
Representatives 
 
NYISO is hosting the platform used by both New York and New England Responsible Settlement 
Parties to submit CTS Interface Bids.  New York RSPs shall submit and confirm bids at CTS Enabled 
Interfaces in accordance with the NYISO Tariffs. 
 
Authorized New England RSPs shall have access to the bidding platform for purposes of submitting 
bids at CTS Enabled Interfaces between the NECA and the NYCA.  Such access will be provided under 
equivalent terms and conditions to New York RSPs.   
 
On an hourly or more frequent basis ISO-NE shall provide NYISO with: (a) a list of all New England 
RSPs that are authorized to submit or confirm bids at CTS Enabled Interfaces and (b) identification 
information for each representative (i.e., an individual) that is authorized to submit or confirm bids at 
CTS Enabled Interfaces on behalf of a New England RSP.  Only representatives designated by ISO-NE 
shall be permitted access to the platform that is used to submit bids at CTS Enabled Interfaces on behalf 
of a New England RSP.  NYISO shall verify the authorization of a New England RSP and its 
representative at the time a bid is submitted, confirmed, modified or deleted.  If it has been more than two 
hours since the NYISO last received from ISO-NE an updated list of all authorized New England RSPs 
and identification information for each representative that is authorized to submit or confirm bids at CTS 
Enabled Interfaces on behalf of a New England RSP, then NYISO shall not allow any New England RSP 
to access the platform that is used to submit bids at CTS Enabled Interfaces until an updated list is 
received.   
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
 
In the event NYISO is not able to implement a new or changed status in a timely fashion, NYISO will 
inform ISO-NE of any delay it is aware of and the reason for the delay, and will implement the new or 
changed status as soon as possible.   
 
2.2 
Confirmation of New England Responsible Settlement Parties 
 
 
A representative submitting an initial or revised CTS Interface Bid, or a bid to schedule a wheel 
through the NYCA at a CTS Enabled External Proxy Bus must belong to an authorized RSP in either 
NYISO or ISO-NE.  In that submittal, the representative must identify the participating RSP in the other 
area.  The other participating RSP must confirm the submittal of the CTS Interface Bid or bid to wheel 
through the NYCA, in order for the bid to be valid.  A CTS Interface Bid or a bid to wheel through the 
NYCA can be withdrawn by either participating RSP; no confirmation is required.   
 
 
An RSP may establish a Confirmed Trust Relationship with another RSP such that the required 
confirmation will be automatically granted for any submittal of a CTS Interface Bid or bid to wheel 
through the NYCA at a CTS Enabled External Proxy Bus that is submitted by the trusted RSP and 
includes both RSPs as parties to the transaction.  Upon representative action to submit, update or revoke a 
Confirmed Trust Relationship, NYISO shall verify that (i) the submittal identifies two authorized RSPs, 
one in New York and one in New England and (ii) the representative belongs to the RSP that is granting 
the Confirmed Trust Relationship to the other RSP. 
 
 
Upon representative action to submit or confirm an initial or revised CTS Interface Bid or bid to 
wheel through the NYCA, or to withdraw a CTS Interface Bid or bid to wheel through the NYCA at a 
CTS Enabled External Proxy Bus, the NYISO shall verify that (i) the submittal identifies two valid RSPs, 
one in New York and one in New England, and (ii) the representative belongs to an RSP that is identified 
on the submittal.  If a Confirmed Trust Relationship exists between the two authorized RSPs and the 
action is taken by a representative that is associated with a trusted RSP to submit or confirm an initial or 
revised CTS Interface Bid or bid to wheel through the NYCA, the bid shall be deemed submitted and 
confirmed, or the revision confirmed. 
 
 
Upon receiving ISO-NE’s notice of suspension or termination of a New England RSP, which ISO-NE 
shall do consistent with its authority under the ISO-NE Tariff, NYISO will promptly: 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
1. cease honoring Confirmed Trust Relationships associated with the suspended or terminated New 
England RSP; 
2. within the real-time market day on which NYISO receives the instruction from ISO-NE, remove 
the suspended or terminated New England RSP’s bids at CTS Enabled Interfaces that are offered 
in the NECA to NYCA direction; 
3. within the real-time market day on which NYISO receives the instruction from ISO-NE, remove 
bids at CTS Enabled Interfaces that are offered in the NECA to NYCA direction that include the 
New England RSP as a trusted RSP; 
4. for all real-time market days subsequent to the real-time market day on which NYISO receives 
the instruction from ISO-NE, remove all of the suspended or terminated New England RSP’s bids 
at CTS Enabled Interfaces; and 
5. for all real-time market days subsequent to the real-time market day on which NYISO receives 
the instruction from ISO-NE, remove all bids at CTS Enabled Interfaces that include the 
suspended or terminated New England RSP as a trusted RSP. 
 
The five changes enumerated above will be effectuated prospectively.  The Parties will not effectuate 
changes one through three for a real-time market hour in which RSPs are no longer able to submit or 
modify bids. 
 
ISO-NE will curtail the e-tags for the transactions associated with the bids NYISO is required to 
remove under the rules set forth above. 
 
 
In the event NYISO is not able to implement a new or changed status that is addressed in this Section 
2.2 in a timely fashion, NYISO will inform ISO-NE of any delay it is aware of and the reasons for the 
delay, and will implement the new or changed status as soon as possible. 
 
 
 
If the NYISO is unable to verify that the required confirmations have been received, then the CTS 
Interface Bid or bid to wheel through the NYCA shall not be considered in the RTC optimization.   
 
 
If the NYISO is not able to validate an RSP or a representative, then that entity or person will not be 
able to submit, modify, confirm or delete a CTS Interface Bid or a bid to wheel through the NYCA.   
 
 
ARTICLE III 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
 
3.0 
CALCULATION OF ISO-NE SUPPLY PRICE POINTS 
 
Each quarter-hour, ISO-NE shall calculate a set of forecast energy prices at its External Proxy Buses 
for each CTS Enabled Interface corresponding to varying interchange levels on that interface.  The results 
will be provided to NYISO as increasing MW-price pairs, where the MW value represents a net 
interchange level on the CTS Enabled Interface and the price value represents ISO-NE’s forecast of its 
real-time LMP for its External Proxy Bus at that net interchange MW level.  ISO-NE will provide no 
fewer than one and no more than 11 MW-price pairs for each of ten consecutive quarter-hour intervals, 
which are referred to as the “ISO-NE Supply Price Points.” 
 
The ISO-NE Supply Price Points are created with a forward-looking, security-constrained economic 
dispatch system that co-optimizes energy and reserve requirements.  This forward-looking co-
optimization will assume the same units are committed as are previously committed, or scheduled to be 
committed, in ISO-NE’s real-time production system.  The energy from currently uncommitted fast-start 
generation will also be considered for dispatch in the forward-looking co-optimization.  ISO-NE Supply 
Price Points shall be calculated using the current production data for load forecasts, active transmission 
constraints, state estimator data, Market Participant energy re-offers, wind forecasts, forecasted net 
interchange on all Interconnections (including forward looking RTC interchange schedules provided by 
NYISO), and operator updates to resource limits. 
 
 
ARTICLE IV 
 
4.0 
SCHEDULING EXTERNAL TRANSACTIONS AT CTS ENABLED INTERFACES 
 
4.1 
Evaluation of CTS Interface Bids 
 
The RTC will use the CTS Interface Bids and the ISO-NE Supply Price Points to economically 
schedule the CTS Interface Bids and determine the net interchange schedules.  The economic scheduling 
of the CTS Interface Bids will be performed simultaneously with the scheduling of internal NYCA 
resources and external transactions at other NYCA Interconnections. 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
For an RTC optimization that schedules hourly CTS Interface Bids, the RTC will use the ISO-NE 
Supply Price Points for each 15-minute interval of the hour.  An hourly CTS Interface Bid will be 
scheduled if it is economic for the hour.   
 
For an RTC optimization that schedules CTS Interface Bids at 15-minute intervals, the RTC 
optimization will use ISO-NE Supply Price Points that have been adjusted to account for the hourly RTC 
external transaction schedules established at CTS Enabled Interfaces, including any scheduled Emergency 
Energy.  
 
When there are multiple CTS Interface Bids at the same bid price but not all of them can be 
economically cleared, the CTS Interface Bids with the same price will be scheduled pro-rata. 
 
The RTC optimization incorporates Ramp Limits and Transfer Limits in the manner described in 
Section 5 of this Schedule D to economically schedule CTS Interface Bids and shall determine: (1) the net 
interchange schedule for each CTS Enabled Interface, (2) the RTC LMP for each CTS Enabled External 
Proxy Bus, and (3) the External Interface Congestion at each CTS Enabled Interface.  
 
4.2 
External Interface Congestion Price Assignment 
 
The RTC optimization will determine the External Interface Congestion at an External Proxy Bus for 
a CTS Enabled Interface if the net interchange schedule is limited in the RTC solution due to one or more 
of the following four reasons: (i) there are more economic transactions offered in a common direction 
(import or export) than the Transfer Limit of the External Proxy Bus can accommodate, or (ii) there are 
fewer economic transactions offered in a common direction (import or export) than the Transfer Limit 
requires, or (iii) the NYCA (system-wide) Ramp Limit prevents the RTC from scheduling one or more 
external transactions at the External Proxy Bus consistent with the economics of the underlying bids, or 
(iv) a Ramp Limit prevents the RTC from scheduling one or more external transactions consistent with 
the economics of the underlying bids (collectively, the “External Proxy Bus Constraints”).   
 
Whenever an External Proxy Bus Constraint at a CTS Enabled Interface is limiting in the RTC 
optimization, the External Interface Congestion at the External Proxy Bus will be assigned, in whole or in 
part, as set forth below. 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
ISO-NE Limiting:  If the RTC optimization is limited by a Transfer Limit determined by an 
ISO-NE Operating Reserve limitation, an ISO-NE minimum generation limitation, or an ISO-NE 
capacity deliverability limit, including when the Transfer Limit is adjusted in accordance with 
Section 5.4 of this Schedule D to accommodate the Ramp Limit while implementing one of these 
limitations, then the portion of the External Interface Congestion associated with the External 
Proxy Bus Constraint shall be assigned to ISO-NE. 
  
NYISO Limiting:  If the RTC optimization is limited by NYCA-wide Ramp Limits, then the 
portion of the External Interface Congestion associated with the External Proxy Bus Constraint 
shall be assigned to NYISO. 
 
NYISO and ISO-NE Limiting:  If the RTC optimization is limited by any Ramp Limit or 
Transfer Limit that is not specifically addressed in the “ISO-NE Limiting” or “NYISO Limiting” 
paragraphs above, or by any Transfer Limit or Ramp Limit that results from an operator override, 
as described in Section 5.2.5 of this Schedule D, the portion of the External Interface Congestion 
for a CTS Enabled Interface that is associated with an External Proxy Bus Constraint shall be 
assigned to both Parties equally.   
 
The RTC solution may be limited by multiple External Proxy Bus Constraints simultaneously.  If this 
occurs, the foregoing rules will apply to each External Proxy Bus Constraint. 
 
If there are not sufficient CTS Interface Bid MWs offered to achieve a Transfer Limit, RTC will 
schedule the available MWs.  In these circumstances, RTC will determine the External Interface 
Congestion at the External Proxy Bus based on the NYISO’s Transmission Shortage Costs as defined in 
the NYISO Tariff.   
 
In order to provide consistent price signals between their respective real-time energy markets, the 
Parties shall each incorporate the foregoing process into the real-time settlement LMP at their External 
Proxy Bus for each CTS Enabled Interface. 
 
 
ARTICLE V 
 
5.0 
CTS ENABLED INTERFACE OPERATING RULES 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
 
5.1 
CTS Enabled Interface Ramp Limits 
 
The default quarter-hour Ramp Limit for the NY/NE Northern AC Interconnection will be mutually 
agreed to by the Parties and posted on the NYISO’s OASIS.   
 
The default top-of-the-hour Ramp Limit for the NY/NE Northern AC Interconnection (for use when 
quarter-hour scheduling is unavailable) will be mutually agreed to by the Parties and posted on the 
NYISO’s OASIS. 
 
In real-time operations, when necessary to protect reliability, the Parties may mutually agree to 
temporarily change the Ramp Limit(s) at any CTS Enabled Interface.  The Parties shall restore the 
modified Ramp Limit to the posted default Ramp Limit as soon as reliable system operations permit and 
it is practicable to do so.   
 
5.2  
Transfer Limits Reflecting Reliability Conditions 
 
A Transfer Limit sets the minimum or maximum net interchange that can be scheduled on a CTS 
Enabled Interface in the RTC solution.  Factors that can set the Transfer Limits include the following:  
1. normal scheduling limits; 
2. Operating Reserve limitations; 
3. minimum generation limitations; 
4. capacity requests; 
5. operator overrides. 
 
5.2.1 Normal Scheduling Limits 
 
The normal scheduling limit for a CTS Enabled Interface is the amount of electric power that can 
normally be transferred over a CTS Enabled Interface.  The Parties may mutually agree to change the 
normal scheduling limits that are used at CTS Enabled Interfaces due to transmission outages, generation 
outages or other changes in system conditions.  In the event the change to a normal scheduling limit is 
planned in advance, the Parties will make reasonable efforts to change the values in time to be included in 
the clearing of their respective day-ahead energy markets and be publicly posted prior to implementation.  
For the real-time operating day, ISO-NE will send its normal scheduling limits at each CTS Enabled 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
Interface to the NYISO via the electronic data exchange to cover the same ten consecutive quarter-hour 
intervals as ISO-NE’s Supply Price Points. 
 
5.2.2 Operating Reserve Limitations   
 
If one Control Area experiences an Operating Reserve deficiency, the other Control Area is not 
obligated to go deficient in its reserves of the same or a higher quality product, but may go deficient in a 
lower-quality reserve product in order to prevent an Operating Reserve deficiency of a higher quality 
reserve product in the other Control Area.  To ensure these mutual reliability objectives can be satisfied, 
the Parties may modify the Transfer Limits in certain conditions as described below. 
 
The RTC optimization procures reserves to meet the NYISO’s reserve requirements and prices 
shortages of reserves using the NYISO’s Operating Reserve demand curves.  The RTC does not have 
information on the amount of Operating Reserve in the NECA.  Therefore, at CTS Enabled Interfaces, 
ISO-NE will use the electronic data exchange to provide to NYISO both the ISO-NE Supply Price Points 
and Transfer Limit values that reflect the net interchange required to meet ISO-NE’s 10-minute and 30-
minute reserve requirements.  When calculated, these values will reflect the net interchange required to 
meet ISO-NE’s 10-minute and 30-minute reserve requirements for the same ten consecutive quarter-hour 
intervals for which ISO-NE’s Supply Price Points are provided.  ISO-NE will calculate these Transfer 
Limit values for each interval based on the Operating Reserve surplus in the NECA when applying the 
forecasted RTC net interchange on the CTS Enabled Interface.  For the purposes of Schedule D, the ISO-
NE Transfer Limit associated with the 10-minute reserve requirement will always be less restrictive than 
the Transfer Limit associated with the ISO-NE 30-minute reserve requirement.  When ISO-NE sends 
Transfer Limits that are associated with Operating Reserve requirements, the ISO-NE Supply Price Points 
must also reflect those expected reserve shortage prices.  RTC will evaluate whether the ISO-NE Transfer 
Limit would preclude NYISO from meeting its reserve requirements for an equal or higher quality reserve 
product.  If so, RTC may adjust the Transfer Limit in accordance with Section 5.3 of this Schedule D, 
based on the principles set forth in the preceding paragraph.   
 
5.2.3 Minimum Generation Limitations   
 
The RTC optimization dispatches the NYISO system’s internal generation as needed when the NYCA 
approaches minimum generation conditions.  The RTC does not have information to assess minimum 
generation conditions within the NECA.  Therefore, at CTS Enabled Interfaces, ISO-NE will use the 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
electronic data exchange to provide to NYISO Transfer Limit values that reflect the net interchange level 
beyond which ISO-NE cannot further dispatch down internal generation while maintaining reliable 
operations.  When ISO-NE sends Transfer Limits for this purpose, the ISO-NE Supply Price Points must 
also reflect these requirements. 
 
ISO-NE shall not send, and NYISO is not required to enforce, a minimum generation Transfer Limit 
that would require the NYCA to accept energy from the NECA.   
 
ISO-NE shall not send both a minimum generation Transfer Limit and Operating Reserve Transfer 
Limits at the same time. 
 
5.2.4 Capacity Transfer Limits 
 
Day-Ahead Coordination 
 
NYISO will provide its day-ahead operating plan to ISO-NE.  Once ISO-NE determines that it 
expects to count on capacity resources located in New York to meet its reserve requirements, ISO-NE 
shall inform NYISO of the expected capacity call. 
 
Real-Time Coordination 
 
ISO-NE Capacity Requests at CTS Enabled Interfaces: 
ISO-NE may request delivery of energy from capacity resources located in the NYCA that have 
obligations in the ISO-NE capacity market over a CTS Enabled Interface.  The ISO-NE operator 
will call the NYISO operator to initiate the capacity request.  Upon receiving the request, the 
NYISO operator will confirm what amount of the capacity request is deliverable based on 
projected transmission constraints (“Capacity Deliverable to ISO-NE”).  If the Capacity 
Deliverable to ISO-NE is non-zero, RTC will determine the ISO-NE capacity that is available 
based on offers submitted by NYCA generators that have sold their capacity to ISO-NE and are 
projected to be available in real-time, subject to any real-time derates (“Capacity Available to 
ISO-NE”).    
 
Transactions to wheel capacity through the NYCA will be excluded from the ISO-NE/NYISO 
capacity request process. 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
 
NYISO Capacity Requests at CTS Enabled Interfaces: 
If the NYISO projects the ISO-NE real-time capacity request could cause the NYISO to become 
capacity deficient, the NYISO may request delivery of energy associated with capacity resources 
located in ISO-NE that have an obligation in the NYISO capacity market over a CTS Enabled 
Interface.  The NYISO operator will call the ISO-NE operator to initiate the capacity request.  
The NYISO will require that its eligible New England-based capacity submit CTS Interface Bids 
to be evaluated by RTC.  It will be up to the supplier of New England-based capacity to ensure 
that the resource(s) backing capacity transactions are available to deliver their capacity to New 
York when they are called on to do so.  At the time of the request, the ISO-NE operator will 
determine whether all or any part of the generation supporting the capacity is available and 
deliverable (“Capacity Available to NYISO”).   
 
Section 5.3 of this Schedule D sets forth how capacity data and Operating Reserve limitations are 
used to establish a Transfer Limit. 
 
5.2.5 Operator Override Transfer Limits 
 
Real-time system conditions may require that a NYISO or ISO-NE operator override the Transfer 
Limit to establish the flow that can be transferred over a CTS Enabled Interface in a reliable manner.  
Except when necessary to protect reliability, an operator override shall not be used to submit limits that 
can be submitted via the electronic data exchange.  
 
5.3  
Establishing Transfer Limits for RTC 
 
RTC determines a net interchange for each interval that must be a value between an upper bound and 
lower bound.  In this section, the high Transfer Limit is the upper bound on that range and the low 
Transfer Limit is the lower bound on that range.  The rules in this Section 5.3 detail how the inputs from 
Section 5.2, which are first tested against the criteria set forth in Section 7.2, are used to determine the 
high and low Transfer Limits in RTC for each quarter-hour interval.  For purposes of this Section 5.3, a 
positive value represents flow from New England to New York, and a negative value represents flow 
from New York to New England.  The values associated with an ISO-NE capacity request, Capacity 
Deliverable to ISO-NE and Capacity Available to ISO-NE are all negative.  
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
1. When a Minimum Generation Transfer Limit is provided by ISO-NE in accordance with Section 
5.2.3, that value is the low Transfer Limit at a CTS Enabled Interface. 
2. When ISO-NE provides Operating Reserve Transfer Limits but has not requested capacity from 
NYISO, the following rules are applied to determine the high Transfer Limit at a CTS Enabled 
Interface: 
a) If the ISO-NE 30-minute Operating Reserve Transfer Limit is greater than or equal to zero, then: 
i. If enforcing the ISO-NE 30-minute Operating Reserve Transfer Limit is projected to cause 
the NYISO to have a deficiency of 10-minute Operating Reserve, the high Transfer Limit is 
the minimum value that is not projected to result in a NYISO 10 minute Operating Reserve 
deficiency; 
ii. Otherwise the high Transfer Limit is the ISO-NE 30-minute Operating Reserve Transfer 
Limit. 
b) If the ISO-NE 30-minute Operating Reserve Transfer Limit is less than zero, then: 
i. If enforcing the ISO-NE 30-minute Operating Reserve Transfer Limit is projected to cause 
the NYISO to have a deficiency of 30-minute Operating Reserve but is not projected to cause 
the NYISO to have a deficiency of 10-minute Operating Reserve, then the high Transfer 
Limit is the lesser of (a) the minimum value that is not projected to result in a NYISO 30-
minute Operating Reserve deficiency, or (b) zero; 
ii. If enforcing the ISO-NE 30-minute Operating Reserve Transfer Limit is projected to cause 
the NYISO to have a deficiency of 10-minute Operating Reserve, then the high Transfer 
Limit is the minimum value that is not projected to result in a NYISO 10-minute Operating 
Reserve deficiency; 
iii. Otherwise the high Transfer Limit is the ISO-NE 30-minute Operating Reserve Transfer 
Limit. 
3. When ISO-NE has requested capacity from NYISO, the high Transfer Limit at a CTS Enabled 
Interface shall be the greater of: 
a) the ISO-NE 30-minute Operating Reserve Transfer Limit, or  
b) [the minimum of (i) the total quantity of CTS Interface Bids backing Capacity Available to 
NYISO or (ii) the Capacity Available to NYISO] plus [the maximum of (iii) the ISO-NE capacity 
request, (iv) the Capacity Deliverable to ISO-NE or (v) the Capacity Available to ISO-NE].   
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
4. When system conditions require that either a low or high Transfer Limit be overridden by the NYISO 
or ISO-NE operator to establish the flow that can be transferred over a CTS Enabled Interface in a 
reliable manner, the override shall establish the low or high Transfer Limit. 
5. Otherwise, the NYISO shall use the normal scheduling Transfer Limit at a CTS Enabled Interface, as 
described in Section 5.2.1. 
 
5.4.  
Interaction Between Transfer Limits and Ramp Limits 
 
a) Except as provided in 5.4(b), when the NYISO’s RTC is provided Transfer Limits that would 
cause it to develop net interchange schedules at a CTS Enabled Interface with ISO-NE that 
exceed the Ramp Limits, RTC will reset the provided Transfer Limits to ensure the agreed Ramp 
Limits are not exceeded. 
b) If any Transfer Limit, other than a normal scheduling limit, is implemented via an operator 
override, then RTC shall permit the agreed Ramp Limits to be exceeded in order to enforce the 
Transfer Limit. 
 
 
ARTICLE VI 
 
6.0 
SETTLEMENT PROVISIONS 
 
ISO-NE shall settle CTS Interface Bids and other bids and offers scheduled at CTS Enabled 
Interfaces with its Market Participants in accordance with the rules set forth in the ISO-NE Tariff. 
 
The NYISO shall settle CTS Interface Bids and other bids scheduled at CTS Enabled Interfaces, with 
its Market Participants in accordance with the rules set forth in the NYISO Tariffs.   
 
Each Party shall address settlement-related corrections and disputes regarding that Party’s settlement 
of CTS transactions in accordance with the settlement correction and dispute resolution provisions set 
forth in that Party’s tariff(s).   
 
Each Party agrees to provide support, including information and data that isn’t otherwise available to 
the other Party, when the requested information is necessary to assist the requesting Party in addressing a 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
settlement (but not price) correction or a settlement-related dispute between the requesting Party and one 
or more of its Market Participants regarding the settlement of CTS transactions. 
 
If an erroneous price is determined at a CTS Enabled External Proxy Bus, independent of any price 
correction process ISO-NE may utilize, the NYISO shall follow the price correction process set forth in 
Attachment E to its Market Administration and Control Area Services Tariff.   
 
If an erroneous price is determined at a CTS Enabled External Proxy Bus, independent of any price 
correction process NYISO may utilize, ISO-NE shall follow the price correction process set forth in the 
ISO-NE Tariff. 
 
 
ARTICLE VII 
 
7.0 
NON-STANDARD CTS OPERATION 
 
7.1 
Permitted Modifications to ISO-NE Supply Price Points 
 
In the event NYISO does not receive the ISO-NE Supply Price Points before it commences the RTC 
optimization, then the last set of ISO-NE Supply Price Points used to perform an RTC optimization will 
be used in the RTC optimization to determine the net interchange schedule until the NYISO receives and 
successfully validates a new set of ISO-NE Supply Price Points.   
 
If one or more quarter-hour intervals within the ISO-NE Supply Price Points fail the NYISO’s input 
checks, the last set of ISO-NE Supply Price Points used to perform an RTC optimization will be used in 
the RTC optimization.   
 
When ISO-NE Supply Price Points do not cover the full quantity (in MWs) of bids that are evaluated 
by RTC, then the last pricing point on either end of the ISO-NE Supply Price Points will be extended by 
NYISO to cover all the bids and offers that are evaluated by RTC.   
 
7.2 
Permitted Modifications to ISO-NE Transfer Limits 
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
In the event NYISO does not receive ISO-NE Transfer Limits or operator override values have not 
been entered before an RTC optimization commences, then the last set of ISO-NE Transfer Limits used to 
perform an RTC optimization will be used in the current RTC optimization. 
 
If one or more quarter-hour intervals within the ISO-NE Transfer Limits fail any of the NYISO’s 
input checks, including the input checks listed below, the last set of ISO-NE Transfer Limits used to 
perform an RTC optimization will be used in the RTC optimization. 
   
• 
A Minimum Generation Transfer Limit and Operating Reserve Transfer Limits will not be sent at 
the same time. 
• 
The Minimum Generation Transfer Limit will be less than or equal to zero.  
• 
If an ISO-NE 10-minute Operating Reserve Transfer Limit is provided, an ISO-NE 30-minute 
Operating Reserve Transfer Limit will also be provided. 
• 
The ISO-NE 30-minute Operating Reserve Transfer Limit will be less than the ISO-NE 10-
minute Operating Reserve Transfer Limit.  
 
7.3 
Hourly Scheduling Under CTS 
 
The Parties may agree to temporarily employ hourly scheduling in RTC on a CTS Enabled Interface 
when necessary to ensure or preserve system reliability or when not able to implement schedules as 
expected due to software or communication issues. 
 
 
ARTICLE VIII 
 
8.0 
JOINT ENERGY SCHEDULING SYSTEM CUSTOMER SERVICE; MAINTENANCE; 
SUSPENSION OF CTS; COOPERATION 
 
8.1 
Joint Energy Scheduling System Customer Service 
 
The NYISO developed and maintains the Joint Energy Scheduling System (“JESS”) platform that 
both New York RSPs and New England RSPs use to submit bids at CTS Enabled Interfaces. 
 
1. Each Party is the primary customer service contact for its respective Market Participants. 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
2. ISO-NE will have read-only access to bids associated with New England Market Participants at 
CTS Enabled Interfaces on the JESS platform. 
 
8.2   
Maintenance 
 
Subject to reasonable expectations, it is the Parties’ goal that the data links, software, and other 
systems necessary to implement CTS are available continuously.  The Parties agree to employ regular 
maintenance, including scheduled maintenance outages when needed, to meet that goal.   
 
In the event of a problem with a data link, software, computational system or data system, the 
responsible Party will use reasonable efforts to promptly address the problem.  The Parties shall work 
together and shall keep each other informed regarding the problem and its resolution. 
 
The Parties shall inform each other in advance of any scheduled testing activities or maintenance 
outages that will affect a CTS Enabled Interface.  Notice shall be provided sufficiently in advance to 
allow each ISO to inform its Market Participants of any impacts on the operation of CTS.   
 
8.3 
Suspension of CTS 
 
The Parties may suspend the scheduling of CTS transactions at CTS Enabled Interfaces due to: (1) the 
inability of the NYISO to receive bids for a CTS Enabled Interface; (2) a failure or outage of the data link 
between the Parties that prevents the timely exchange of information necessary to implement CTS 
transactions; (3) the actual or suspected failure of any software, computational, or data system that is 
necessary to implement CTS transactions; (4) the need to verify the functionality of the tools that are 
necessary to implement CTS; or (5) when necessary to ensure or preserve NYISO or ISO-NE system 
reliability. 
 
A Party that determines that any of the foregoing conditions have occurred shall, as soon as 
practicable, notify the other Party.   
 
The Parties shall resolve issues causing the failure or outage of the data link, software, computational 
systems, or data systems as soon as possible, and will use reasonable efforts to promptly address the 
problem.  The Parties shall work together and shall keep each other informed regarding the problem and 
its resolution.  The Parties shall resume implementation of CTS following, as applicable, the successful 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
testing of the data link or relevant system(s) after the inability to receive offers or bids, failure, or 
condition is resolved, or after the resolution of the system reliability issue. 
 
When CTS is suspended the Parties shall mutually agree to interchange schedules at CTS Enabled 
Interfaces.   
 
8.4 
Cooperation 
 
The Parties will cooperate to review the data and mutually identify or resolve errors and anomalies.  
If one Party determines that it is required to self-report a potential violation to the Commission’s Office of 
Enforcement regarding its compliance with this Schedule D, the reporting Party shall inform, and provide 
a copy of the self-report to the other Party.  Any such report provided by one Party to the other shall be 
Confidential Information. 
 
 
ARTICLE IX 
 
9.0 
CTS CHANGE MANAGEMENT PROCESS 
 
9.1  
Notice 
 
Prior to materially changing any tariff language, software or process that is directly involved in 
implementing this Schedule D, the Party desiring the change shall notify the other Party’s data exchange 
contact appointed under the Coordination Agreement, in writing or via email, of the proposed change. 
The notice shall include a complete and detailed description of the proposed change, the reason for the 
proposed change, and the impacts the proposed change is expected to have on the implementation of CTS. 
 
9.2  
Opportunity to Request Additional Information 
 
Following receipt of the Notice described in Section 9.1, the receiving Party may make reasonable 
requests for additional information/documentation from the other Party.  This may include a request by a 
Party to be involved in the testing of the changes.  Absent mutual agreement of the Parties, the 
submission of a request for additional information under this Section shall not delay the obligation to 
timely note any objection pursuant to Section 9.3, below. 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
 
9.3  
Objection to Change 
 
Within ten business days after receipt of the Notice described in Section 9.1 (or within such longer 
period of time as the Parties mutually agree), the receiving Party may notify in writing or via email the 
other Party of its disagreement with the proposed change.  Any such notice must specifically identify and 
describe the concern(s) that required the receiving Party to object to the described change. 
 
9.4  
Implementation of Change 
 
The Party proposing a change to a process that is directly involved in implementing this Schedule D 
shall not implement such change until (a) it receives written or email notification from the other Party that 
the other Party concurs with the change, or (b) the receiving Party fails to notify in writing or via email 
the other Party of its disagreement with the proposed change within the notice period specified in Section 
9.3, or (c) completion of any dispute resolution process initiated pursuant to this Agreement. 
 
 
 
ARTICLE X 
 
10.0 
AUDITS, CERTIFICATION AND TESTING 
 
Each Party shall provide to the other Party the results of any certification or audit it procures 
regarding CTS-related software functions, subject to the following conditions: (1) the disclosure may be 
limited to the portions of the certification or audit that addresses the CTS-related software, and need only 
include the portions of the certification or audit that address the CTS-related functioning of the software; 
(2) if the providing Party indicates that the certification or audit is Confidential Information it shall be 
treated as such by the receiving party; and (3) this provision does not require a Party to disclose 
information that is subject to a legal privilege.   
 
Before CTS is implemented, and upon any material changes to any components thereof, the Parties 
shall test the processes and component software.   
 
Effective Date: 5/4/2021 - Docket #: ER21-1278-000 
 
Each Party shall, at its sole expense, take appropriate actions to address any actual or apparent breach 
of cyber security related to CTS, and shall provide prompt notification to the other Party of any such 
incident.   
 
Each party will undertake an annual Service Organization Controls report that covers CTS process-
related controls prepared and opined by its external auditors in accordance with Statement on Standards 
for Attestation Engagements No. 16 or AICPA/CICA Principles and Criterion for System Reliability 
(SSAE 16 engagement).  The NYISO report will include controls related to the Joint Energy Scheduling 
System bidding platform. 
 
Each Party shall promptly provide to the other Party the results of its annual Service Organization 
Controls report, subject to the following conditions: (1) the disclosure may be limited to the portions of 
the report or audit that address CTS, and need only include the portions of the report or audit that address 
CTS; (2) if the providing Party indicates that the certification or audit is Confidential Information it shall 
be treated as such by the receiving party; and (3) this provision does not require a Party to disclose 
information that is subject to a legal privilege. 
 
