 
 
ATTACHMENT E 
SERVICE AGREEMENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
SERVICE AGREEMENT NO. 1 
 
UNEXECUTED 
MARKET PARTICIPANT SERVICE AGREEMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
The entities for whom an unexecuted Market Participant Service Agreement is on file with the Commission 
(see Docket No. ER05-521-000) are identified in the ISO’s Electric Quarterly Reports (“EQRs”) as having 
a “contract_service_agreement_id” of “Service Agreement No. 1.”  The EQRs are available for download 
at http://www.ferc.gov/docs-filing/eqr.asp.  The form of Service Agreement No. 1 immediately follows 
this page. 
 
 
 
 
 
MARKET PARTICIPANT SERVICE AGREEMENT 
 
This MARKET PARTICIPANT SERVICE AGREEMENT is dated this _____ day of _______, _____ and 
is entered into by and between:  
 
[Name of Market Participant] having its registered and principal place of business located at 
[Address] (the “Market Participant”);   
 
and   
 
ISO New England Inc., a Delaware corporation having its principal place of business located at 
One Sullivan Road, Holyoke, MA 01040-2841, and acting as the Regional Transmission 
Organization for New England (“ISO”).  
 
The Market Participant and the ISO are sometimes hereinafter referred to individually as a “Party” and 
collectively as the “Parties.”   
 
BACKGROUND  
 
1. 
The ISO operates the New England Transmission System pursuant to a certain Transmission 
Operating Agreement dated February 1, 2005, and other agreements entered into with merchant and other 
transmission owners.  The ISO’s operation of the New England Transmission System is intended to insure 
the reliability of the New England Transmission System.  Subject to the requirements of bulk power 
supply reliability, the ISO provides non-discriminatory, open access to the New England Transmission 
System pursuant to the ISO’s Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff on file with the Federal Energy 
Regulatory Commission (the “Commission”) (as amended from time to time, the “Tariff”).  
 
2. 
The ISO operates competitive markets for the purchase and sale of energy, capacity, FTRs, certain 
demand response services, and certain Ancillary Services.  The ISO also offers other related products, 
services and transactions pursuant to the Tariff.  The ISO is the Counterparty with respect to transactions 
involving these markets, products, and services. Accordingly, the ISO seeks to create and sustain open, 
non-discriminatory, competitive, unbundled markets for energy, capacity, and ancillary services (including 
Operating Reserves) that operate efficiently consistent with proper standards of reliability and the 
long-term sustainability of competitive markets.   
 
 
 
3. 
The ISO operates purchase programs for certain Ancillary Services that are not procured through 
competitive markets. The ISO seeks to operate purchase programs for such services at rates that are 
intended to compensate sellers at not less than the incremental cost of providing such services and to attract 
and sustain adequate supplies of such services.  
 
4. 
The ISO seeks to provide transparency with respect to the operation of and the pricing in markets 
and purchase programs to allow informed participation and encourage ongoing market improvements.  
 
5. 
The ISO seeks to provide access to competitive markets within the New England Control Area and 
to neighboring regions.  
 
6. 
The Market Participant made an application to the ISO to be eligible to participate in the markets 
and purchase programs for energy, capacity ancillary services and related products and services 
administered by the ISO.  
 
7. 
The ISO has accepted the Market Participant’s application.  
 
8. 
The Market Participant and the ISO wish to set forth the terms and conditions upon which the ISO 
will provide services and the Market Participant may participate in the markets and programs administered 
by the ISO.  
 
AGREEMENTS 
 
In consideration of the mutual covenants set forth herein, the Parties, intending to be legally bound, agree as 
follows: 
 
ARTICLE 1 
DEFINITIONS, INTERPRETATIONS AND OBJECTIVES 
 
1.1 
Definitions.  Capitalized terms not defined herein shall have the meanings given them in the Tariff  
 
1.2 
Interpretation.  In this Agreement, unless otherwise indicated or otherwise required by the 
context, the following rules of interpretation shall apply:  
 
 
 
(a) 
Reference to and the definition of any document or specific section thereof (including this 
Agreement and the ISO New England Operating Documents) shall be deemed a reference to such document 
as it may be amended, supplemented, revised or modified from time to time and any document that is a 
successor thereto.  Nothing herein shall limit the ISO’s right to modify the ISO New England Operating 
Documents as expressly provided in the Tariff and the laws and regulations governing the adoption and 
amendment of the ISO New England Operating Documents. 
 
(b) 
The article and section headings and other captions in this Agreement are for the purpose of 
reference only and do not limit or affect its meaning.  
 
(c) 
Defined terms in the singular shall include the plural and vice versa, and the masculine, 
feminine or neuter gender shall include all genders.  
 
(d) 
The term “including” when used herein shall be by the way of example only and shall not 
be considered in any way a limitation.  
 
(e) 
Unless the context otherwise requires, any reference to a Party includes a reference to its 
permitted successors and assigns.  
 
1.3 
Mission of the ISO.  The mission of the ISO is (through means including but not limited to 
planning, central dispatching, coordinated maintenance of electric supply and demand-side resources and 
transmission facilities, obtaining emergency power for Market Participants from other Control Areas, 
system restoration (when required), the development of market rules, the provision of an open access 
regional transmission tariff and the provision of a means for effective coordination with other control areas 
and utilities situated in the United States and Canada):  
 
(a) 
to assure the bulk power supply within the New England Control Area conforms to proper 
standards of reliability;  
 
(b) 
to create and sustain open, non-discriminatory, competitive, unbundled markets for energy, 
capacity, and ancillary services (including Operating Reserves) that are (i) economically efficient and 
balanced between buyers and sellers, and (ii) provide an opportunity for a participant to receive 
compensation through the market for a service it provides, in a manner consistent with proper standards of 
 
 
reliability and the long-term sustainability of competitive markets;  
 
(c) 
to provide market rules that (i) promote a market based on voluntary participation, (ii) 
allow market participants to manage the risks involved in offering and purchasing services, and (iii) 
compensate at fair value (considering both benefits and risks) any required service, subject to FERC’s 
jurisdiction and review; 
 
(d) 
to allow informed participation and encourage ongoing market improvements;  
 
(e) 
to provide transparency with respect to the operation of and the  pricing in markets and 
purchase programs;  
 
(f) 
to provide access to competitive markets within the New England Control Area and to 
neighboring regions; and  
 
(g) 
to provide for an equitable allocation of costs, benefits and responsibilities among market 
participants.  
 
In fulfilling this mission and consistent with the preceding principles, the ISO shall strive to perform all its 
functions and services in a cost-effective manner, for the benefit of all those served by the ISO.  To assist 
stakeholders in evaluating any major ISO initiative that affects market design, system planning or operation 
of the New England bulk power system, the ISO will provide quantitative and qualitative information on 
the need for and the impacts, including costs, of the initiative. 
 
ARTICLE 2 
TERM AND TERMINATION 
 
2.1 
Effective Date.  This Agreement shall be effective February 1, 2005.  This Agreement shall 
remain in full force and effect until terminated pursuant to Section 2.2 or 2.3 of this Agreement.  
 
2.2 
Termination by the ISO.  The ISO may terminate this Agreement, upon the Market Participant 
committing any material default under this Agreement as provided in the ISO New England Operating 
Documents.  With respect to any termination pursuant to this Section, the ISO must file a notice of 
termination with the Commission.  This Agreement shall terminate upon acceptance by the Commission of 
 
 
such notice of termination.  
 
2.3 
Termination by Market Participant.  In the event that the Market Participant no longer wishes 
to participate in the New England Markets or provide or receive services through the New England 
Transmission System with respect to any Asset then subject to this Agreement it may terminate this 
Agreement by complying with applicable provisions of the ISO New England Operating Documents, 
including Sections 3.9 and 3.10 of Section I of the Tariff, as well as all other legal or regulatory 
requirements applicable to the Market Participant.  
 
2.4 
Other Remedies.  Nothing in Section 2.2 shall limit the remedies of the ISO under applicable law 
or the ISO New England Operating Documents, Including the right as applicable, to suspend the rights of 
one or more Assets to submit Bids, Schedules, Supply Offers or supply offers for Ancillary Services in the 
New England Markets or otherwise provide or receive services through the New England Transmission 
System. 
 
2.5 
Survival of Obligations.  Notwithstanding any termination of this Agreement, any accrued 
obligations under this Agreement or the ISO New England Operating Documents, including obligations for 
the payment of money or obligations to provide information regarding operations or activities conducted 
prior to termination, shall survive the termination of this Agreement.   
 
ARTICLE 3 
GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS 
  
3.1 
ISO Services.    
 
(a) 
The ISO agrees to operate the New England Control Area, provide transmission service 
through the New England Transmission System, and administer the New England Markets all in 
accordance with the ISO New England Operating Documents.  
 
(b) 
The ISO will monitor the New England Markets in accordance with the ISO New England 
Operating Documents.  
 
(c) 
The ISO will maintain procedures for interconnection of Assets with the New England 
Transmission System in accordance with the New England Operating Documents.  
 
 
 
(d) 
The ISO does not provide Local Service.  Local Service is acquired through a separate 
transmission service agreement with the applicable PTO.    
 
3.2 
Service Under the Tariff.  The Market Participant accepts service under the Tariff as a 
participant in the New England Markets.  Market Participant agrees to be bound by the terms of the ISO 
New England Operating Documents and to make timely payment of all amounts due under the ISO New 
England Operating Documents.  
 
3.3 
Registration of Assets. 
 
(a) 
The Market Participant must register each Asset of which it is the Owner that seeks 
eligibility to sell or purchase services in the New England Markets by complying with the requirements of 
the ISO New England Operating Documents including, as applicable, registration information required by 
Section 12.2 of ISO New England Manual 28, approval of an interconnection application required by 
Section I, Section 3.9 of the Tariff, compliance with the metering requirements of ISO New England 
Operating Procedure No. 18, and providing the electrical operating information required by ISO New 
England Operating Procedure No. 14.  Market Participant must also register its contractual interest in any 
Load Asset which it has transferred to a new Owner without a corresponding transfer of legal title to the 
Load Asset (whether or not the Market Participant is the holder of the legal title).  
 
(b) 
The ISO shall be entitled to inspect and verify all registration information, including 
technical specifications, provided pursuant to Section 3.3.  
 
(c) 
The Market Participant shall provide written notice to the ISO of any proposed changes to 
the registration information as required by the ISO New England Operating Documents.  
 
(d) 
The Market Participant may withdraw Assets from the provision of particular services in 
accordance with the procedures set forth in the ISO New England Operating Documents.  
 
3.4 
Market Participant Operating Responsibilities.  The Market Participant shall direct, physically 
operate, repair and maintain all metering and interconnection equipment under its control and all Assets 
providing services through the New England Transmission System (a) consistent with New England 
Transmission System reliability; (b) in accordance with (i) this Agreement, (ii) all applicable provisions of 
 
 
the ISO New England Operating Documents and (iii) all applicable reliability guidelines, policies, 
standards, rules, regulations, orders, license requirements and all other requirements of NERC, NPCC, 
other applicable reliability organizations’ reliability rules and all applicable requirements of federal or state 
laws or regulatory authorities; and (c) in such a manner as to maintain safe operations, including the 
enforcement of rules and procedures to ensure the safety of personnel.  
 
3.5 
Reserved Rights. 
 
(a) 
Except for obligations and limitations specifically imposed by the ISO New England 
Operating Documents, the Market Participant retains all rights that it otherwise has incident to its 
ownership of and legal and equitable title to, its Assets, including all land and land rights and the right to 
build, acquire, sell, lease, merge, dispose of, retire, use as security, or otherwise transfer or convey all or any 
part of its Assets.  
 
(b) 
The Market Participant has the right to adopt and implement procedures, consistent with 
Good Utility Practice, and to take such actions as it deems necessary to protect its facilities from physical 
damage or to prevent injury or damage to persons or property.  
 
(c) 
Nothing contained in this agreement is intended to alter or waive any rights that the ISO or 
the Market Participant may have to make filings with the Commission under the Federal Power Act.  
 
3.6 
Participants Agreement.  By entering into this Agreement, the Market Participant agrees to be 
bound by the Participants Agreement, through NEPOOL or individually, as the case may be, and to pay the 
fees and charges specified therein.  The Participants Agreement provides processes for stakeholder input, 
individually and collectively, into revisions of certain provisions of ISO New England Operating 
Documents and the planning process for the New England Transmission System.  
 
ARTICLE 4 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO BUYERS AND SELLERS 
  
4.1 
Purchases and Sales.  Market Participant’s purchases from, and sales to, the ISO will be made 
pursuant to the terms of the ISO New England Operating Documents.  
 
4.2 
Participation in Markets and Programs.  In connection with submitting schedules, demand 
 
 
bids, and supply offers or withdrawing energy from the system in Real-Time or otherwise offering to 
provide or providing services, or offering to buy or receive services,  through the New England Markets, 
the Market Participant agrees at all times to comply with the ISO New England Operating Documents.  
The Market Participant hereby warrants to the ISO that, unless the ISO New England Operating Documents 
specifically permit supply offers unrelated to physical parameters, whenever it submits a Supply Offer for 
Energy or supply offer for Ancillary Services or a demand response service, it has the capability and the 
intention to provide that service in accordance with the ISO New England Operating Documents and it will 
comply with ISO dispatch instructions for the provisions of service in accordance with the ISO New 
England Operating Documents. 
 
4.3 
Rate Authority.  Market Participant warrants that, at any time it has registered one or more 
Assets, it either (a) has on file with the Commission for each such Asset market-based rate authority or 
other Commission-approved basis for setting prices for services offered by means of the New England 
Transmission System by such Asset or (b) is exempt from the requirement to have rates for services on file 
with the Commission.  
 
4.4 
Central Dispatch.  The Market Participant shall, to the extent scheduled or otherwise obligated 
under the ISO New England Operating Documents, either individually or through the Second Restated 
NEPOOL Agreement, as provided therein, subject each of the Assets it owns or operates to central dispatch 
by the ISO, provided, however, that each Market Participant shall at all times be the sole judge as to 
whether or not and to what extent safety requires that at any time any of such Assets will be operated at less 
than their full capacity or not at all.  
 
4.5 
Disputes.  All disputes regarding amounts payable for services purchased will be handled in 
accordance with the ISO New England Operating Documents. 
 
ARTICLE 5 
[RESERVED] 
 
 
ARTICLE 6 
FORCE MAJEURE; INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITIES 
 
6.1 
Force Majeure Event.  An event of Force Majeure shall be as set forth in the Tariff.  
 
 
 
6.2 
Reasonable Efforts to Perform and Notice.  When the performance of either Party under this 
Agreement is hindered by an event of Force Majeure, that Party shall make all reasonable efforts to perform 
its obligations under this Agreement, and shall promptly notify the other Party and any affected 
Transmission Customers, if appropriate, of the commencement and end of each event of Force Majeure in 
accordance with the ISO New England Operating Documents.  
 
6.3 
Indemnification and Liabilities.  The indemnification responsibilities of the Parties, to the extent 
permitted by law, shall be as set forth in the Tariff.   
 
ARTICLE 7 
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
7.1 
Commission Filing.  The ISO shall file this Agreement with, or electronically report this 
Agreement to, as applicable, the Commission.  
 
7.2 
Notices.  Unless otherwise expressly specified or permitted by the terms hereof, all 
communications and notices provided for herein shall be in writing and any such communication or notice 
shall become effective (a) upon personal delivery thereof, including by overnight mail or courier service, 
(b) in the case of notice by United States mail, certified or registered, postage prepaid, return receipt 
requested, upon receipt thereof, or (c) in the case of notice by facsimile, upon receipt thereof; provided that 
such transmission is promptly confirmed by either of the methods set forth in clauses (a) or (b) above, in 
each case addressed to each Party hereto at its address(es) set forth below or, at such other address(es) as 
such Party may from time to time designate by written notice to the other Party hereto; further provided that 
a notice given in connection with this Section 7.2 but received on a day other than a business day, or after 
business hours in the situs of receipt, will be deemed to be received on the next business day: 
 
 
MARKET PARTICIPANT: 
 
 
ISO New England Inc.: 
 
 
[Name, Address, Tel., Fax of  
[Name, Address, Tel., Fax of ISO 
Market Participant Representative]   
Representative]  
 
 
7.3 
Other Agreements.  In the event of a conflict between this Agreement and other agreements with 
 
 
respect to subjects addressed in this Agreement, this Agreement shall govern.   
 
7.4 
Waiver.  Any term or condition of this Agreement may be waived at any time by the Party that is 
entitled to the benefit thereof, but no such waiver shall be effective unless set forth in a written instrument 
duly executed by or on behalf of the Party waiving such term or condition.  No waiver by any Party of any 
term or condition of this Agreement, in any one or more instances, shall be deemed to be or construed as a 
waiver of the same or any other term or condition of this Agreement on any future occasion.  All remedies, 
either under this Agreement or by applicable law or otherwise afforded, shall be cumulative and not 
alternative.  
 
7.5 
Amendment.  Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, this Agreement shall not be 
subject to modification or amendment unless agreed to in writing by both Parties hereto.  Notwithstanding 
the foregoing, nothing in this Agreement shall restrict in any way the rights of either Party to submit an 
application under Section 206 of the Federal Power Act for revisions to this Agreement.  
 
The Parties acknowledge that this Agreement is entered into subject to the approval and continuing 
jurisdiction of the Commission.  The ISO will notify the Market Participant of any changes to this 
Agreement required or approved by the Commission.  Any such changes will take effect at the times and in 
the manner specified by the Commission in its order requiring or approving such changes.  The Market 
Participant may, subject to the procedures referenced in Section 2.3, terminate this Agreement rather than 
accept any such changes.  
 
7.6 
No Third Party Beneficiaries.  It is not the intention of this Agreement or of the Parties to confer 
a third party beneficiary status or rights of action upon any Person or entity whatsoever other than the 
Parties and nothing contained herein, either express or implied, shall be construed to confer upon any 
Person or entity other than the Parties any rights of action or remedies either under this Agreement or in any 
manner whatsoever.  
 
7.7 
No Assignment..  Neither this Agreement nor any right, interest or obligation hereunder may be 
assigned by a Party (including by operation of law) without the prior written consent of each other Party in 
its sole discretion and any attempt at assignment in contravention of this Section 7.7 shall be void. 
 
7.8 
Governing Law.  This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the 
laws of the State of Delaware, including all matters of construction, validity and performance without 
 
 
regard to the conflicts-of-laws provisions thereof.  
 
7.9 
Consent to Service of Process.  Each of the Parties hereby consents to service of process by 
registered mail, Federal Express or similar courier at the address to which notices to it are to be given, it 
being agreed that service in such manner shall constitute valid service upon such party or its respective 
successors or assigns in connection with any such action or proceeding; provided, however, that nothing in 
this Section 7.9 shall affect the right of any such Parties or their respective successors and permitted assigns 
to serve legal process in any other manner permitted by applicable law or affect the right of any such Parties 
or their respective successors and assigns to bring any action or proceeding against any other one of such 
Parties or its respective property in the courts of other jurisdictions.  
 
7.10 
Dispute Resolution.  The Parties shall resolve their disputes relating to this Agreement utilizing 
the dispute resolution provisions of the Tariff.  
 
7.11 
Invalid Provisions.  If any provision of this Agreement is held to be illegal, invalid or 
unenforceable under any present or future law, and if the rights or obligations of any Party under this 
Agreement shall not be materially and adversely affected thereby, (a) such provision shall be fully 
severable, (b) this Agreement shall be construed and enforced as if such illegal, invalid or unenforceable 
provision had never comprised a part hereof, (c) the remaining provisions of this Agreement shall remain in 
full force and effect and shall not be affected by the illegal, invalid or unenforceable provision or by its 
severance herefrom, and (d) the court holding such provision to be illegal, invalid or unenforceable may in 
lieu of such provision add as a part of this Agreement a legal, valid and enforceable provision as similar in 
terms to such illegal, invalid or unenforceable provision as it deems appropriate.  
 
7.11 
Relationship of the Parties.  Nothing in this Agreement is intended to create a partnership, joint 
venture or other joint legal entity making either Party jointly or severally liable for the acts or omissions of 
the other Party. 
 
7.12 
Confidentiality.  Confidential information acquired by either Party pursuant to this Agreement 
shall be governed by the ISO New England Operating Documents.  
 
7.13 
Counterparts.  This Agreement may be executed in any number of counterparts, each of which 
shall be deemed an original, but all of which together shall constitute but one and the same instrument.  
The Parties hereto agree that any document or signature delivered by facsimile transmission shall be 
 
 
deemed an original executed document for all purposes hereof.  
 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties have caused this Agreement to be duly executed on behalf of each 
by and through their authorized representatives as of the date hereinabove written.  
 
Market Participant: 
The ISO: 
 
[NAME OF MARKET PARTICIPANT] 
ISO New England Inc. 
 
By: _____________________________ 
By: ____________________________ 
Name: 
Name: 
Title: 
Title: 
Date: 
Date: 
[for Munis: Town of __________________, 
Acting by and through its Municipal Light 
Department as it is a member of NEPOOL] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
