DMEAST #9695005 v1 
 
 
 
December 29, 2006 
 
 
VIA MESSENGER 
 
Honorable Magalie Roman Salas, Secretary 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission 
888 First Street, N.E. 
Washington, D.C. 20426 
 
Re: 
ISO New England Inc. and NEPOOL Participants Committee,  
Amendments to Schedule 2 – Reactive Power Supply and Voltage 
Control of the ISO New England Inc. Open Access Transmission 
Tariff ;  Docket No. ER07-___-000 
 
 
Dear Secretary Salas: 
 
 
Pursuant to Section 205 of the Federal Power Act (“FPA”),1 ISO New England 
Inc. (the “ISO”) and New England Power Pool (“NEPOOL”) Participants Committee2 
hereby jointly submit an original and six (6) copies of this transmittal letter and revised 
tariff sheets reflecting proposed amendments to Schedule 2 – Reactive Supply and 
Voltage Control from Generation Resource Service (“Schedule 2”) of the ISO Open 
Access Transmission Tariff (“OATT”), including a Schedule 2 VAR Payment 
Implementation Rule to be added to the OATT (collectively, the “Schedule 2 
Amendments”).   
 
The proposed Schedule 2 Amendments build upon the already existing rate 
design, as approved by the Commission since 1999,3 to increase the ISO’s access to 
reactive power resources and, thereby, enhance reliability in New England.  The 
                                                 
1 16 U.S.C. § 824(d) (2005). 
 
2 Capitalized terms used but not defined in this filing have the meanings ascribed thereto in the ISO’s 
Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff, FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 (the “Tariff”), the Second Restated 
New England Power Pool Agreement and the Participants Agreement.  The OATT is Section II of the 
Tariff.   
 
3 New England Power Pool, 88 FERC ¶ 61,140 (1999). 
Honorable Magalie R. Salas 
December 29, 2006 
Page 2 of 24 
 
 
DMEAST #9695005 v1 
Schedule 2 Amendments enhance reliability in New England by broadening the scope of 
eligibility for payment under Schedule 2 of the OATT to include qualified non-generator 
reactive power resources and by updating the rate paid for reactive power capability to 
reflect the current mix of generation in New England.  These proposed amendments have 
the overwhelming support of the NEPOOL Participants, as reflected in a vote of almost 
90% in support by the Participants Committee.   
 
 
For the reasons described below, the ISO and NEPOOL submit that the Schedule 
2 Amendments are just and reasonable.  ISO and NEPOOL request that the Commission 
accept the Schedule 2 Amendments, without modification, to become effective on  
March 1, 2007, sixty (60) days after the date of this filing.   
 
I.   
OVERVIEW OF FILING 
 
Based on NEPOOL Participant interest, the ISO and NEPOOL initiated a review 
of the rules in New England governing the provision of reactive power and voltage 
support, including eligibility of resources, compensation and testing to recommend 
whether those rules should change and, if so, how they should change.4  The proposed 
Schedule 2 Amendments, as described below, reflect the input from this review.  For 
purposes of completeness, Section IV of this filing provides a brief history of the 
development of the existing rate schedule, as initially approved by the Commission in 
1999, and as subsequently revised.   
 
The proposed Schedule 2 Amendments are described in Section V of this filing.  
Specifically, Section V describes the proposed revisions to Schedule 2 to:  (1) extend the 
current compensation for reactive power and voltage support to include non-generator 
dynamic reactive power resources; (2) clarify the eligibility criteria for all dynamic 
reactive power resources, including both generator and non-generator resources; (3) 
update the Capacity Cost (“CC”) component of the rate design to account for changes in 
the cost-basis and mix of reactive power resources in New England since 1998; (4) 
expand the current testing program to include testing for leading capability; and (5) 
identify alternative means under the ISO OATT by which a non-generator dynamic 
reactive power resource can receive payment under the ISO OATT if it does not elect to 
recover its costs under Schedule 2.  Additionally, Section V describes the required 
revisions to the operational and testing rules in order to accommodate the 
recommendations to expand the class of resources eligible for Schedule 2 payments to 
include non-generator dynamic resources, update the fixed CC charge for VAR capacity 
                                                 
4 As further discussed in Section VI of this filing, in December 2004, the Transmission Committee 
established a VAR Working Group (the “VWG”) to review the rules in New England governing the 
provision of reactive power and voltage support, including eligibility of resources, compensation and 
testing to recommend whether those rules should change and, if so, how they should change.  The 
Transmission Committee is a Standing Committee under Section 8.2.1 of the Participants Agreement, 
which is an agreement between the ISO and NEPOOL that is part of the RTO arrangements for New 
England. 
Honorable Magalie R. Salas 
December 29, 2006 
Page 3 of 24 
 
 
DMEAST #9695005 v1 
and modify the application of the CC Rate to recognize leading as well as lagging VAR 
capability.  Section V also addresses the proposed phased-in implementation schedule for 
the Schedule 2 Amendments, which provides that commencing:  
 
• March 1, 2007 – Cross Sound Cable will be accepted into the program as a 
Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resource eligible for the CC Rate 
payment provided that it has satisfied all criteria specified in Section II.B, 
including a requirement that operating protocols for provision of reactive 
power voltage support from such equipment have been agreed to, in 
writing, between the ISO and the Cross Sound Cable operator. 
 
• June 1, 2007 – The Base CC Rate will increase from $1.05/kVAR-year to 
$2.32/kVAR-year for the lagging capabilities of all dynamic reactive 
resources that have been accepted into the program.  At this time, the ISO 
also will initiate the testing for the leading capabilities; that is, all 
Qualified Generator and Non-Generator Reactive Resource seeking to be 
compensated under Schedule 2 will be required to provide the appropriate 
data necessary to test for leading capability and the first set of these 
resources will perform leading capability tests during the 2007 leading 
capability test period. 
 
• January 1, 2008 – The Adjusted Base CC Rate will be applied to reflect 
leading and lagging capability.  Also, on this date, all other non-generator 
dynamic reactive resources that have demonstrated their compliance with 
the eligibility criteria established in Section II.B will be eligible to receive 
the CC payment under Schedule 2.        
 
The proposed Amendments have been incorporated in Schedule 2 of the OATT in 
the following manner: 
 
Section I – This Section has been added to Schedule 2 to provide definitions of the new 
terms used throughout the rate schedule.  
 
Section II – This Section has been added to provide the specific criteria that “Qualified 
Generator Reactive Resources” and “Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resources” must 
meet to be eligible for CC Rate payments under Schedule 2.  Section II also includes a 
provision addressing the treatment of Non-Dynamic Reactive Resources for purposes of 
compensation. 
 
Section III – This Section provides the formula applied to determine the payments to be 
made by Transmission Customers for VAR Service provided under Schedule 2.  The 
provisions set forth in Section III are provided in Section I of the currently effective 
Schedule 2.  The revisions reflected in this section clarify the provision of VAR Service, 
and add consistency in the terminology used.  
Honorable Magalie R. Salas 
December 29, 2006 
Page 4 of 24 
 
 
DMEAST #9695005 v1 
Section IV – This Section has been added to define the cost allocation for VAR Service 
costs.  Section IV does not change the existing cost allocation approach provided under 
the current rate schedule.     
 
Section V – This Section sets forth the elements of the Schedule 2 rate design, as 
provided in Section II of the currently effective Schedule 2.  As Section V reflects, while 
the existing Schedule 2 rate design remains unchanged, each element has been modified 
to recognize the addition of Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resources.  The 
provisions regarding the CC Rate have also been revised to provide for the update of the 
amount paid for the CC component, and to provide payment to resources based on their 
leading as well as their lagging capability.   
 
Section VI – This Section has been added to provide alternative methods of payment for 
Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resources that cannot recover their costs under 
Schedule 2. 
 
Schedule 2 VAR Implementation Rule – The Implementation Rule has been added to 
describe the methodology for calculating and allocating dynamic reactive power capacity 
cost payments over a full range of leading and lagging capability. 
 
II.   
COMMUNICATIONS 
 
 
The ISO is the private, non-profit entity that serves as the regional transmission 
organization (“RTO”) for New England.  The ISO operates the New England bulk power 
system and administers New England’s wholesale electricity markets pursuant to the 
Tariff and the Transmission Operating Agreements with the New England Transmission 
Owners.  In its capacity as an RTO, the ISO has the responsibility to protect the short-
term reliability of the New England Area and to operate the system according to 
reliability standards established by the Northeast Power Coordinating Council (“NPCC”) 
and the North American Electric Reliability Council (“NERC”).   
 
 
NEPOOL is a voluntary association organized in 1971 pursuant to the New 
England Power Pool Agreement.  NEPOOL has grown to include over 300 members, and 
is the principal stakeholder organization of the New England RTO.  The Participants 
include all of the electric utilities rendering or receiving services under the Tariff, as well 
as independent power generators, marketers, load aggregators, brokers, consumer-owned 
utility systems, demand response providers, end users and a merchant transmission 
provider.  Pursuant to revised governance provisions accepted by the Commission in ISO 
New England Inc. et al., 109 FERC ¶ 61,147 (2004), the Participants act through the 
NEPOOL Participants Committee.  The Participants Committee is authorized by Section 
6.1 of the Second Restated NEPOOL Agreement and Section 8.1.3(c) of the Participants 
Agreement to represent NEPOOL in proceedings before the Commission.  
 
Honorable Magalie R. Salas 
December 29, 2006 
Page 5 of 24 
 
 
DMEAST #9695005 v1 
All correspondence and communications in this proceeding should be addressed 
to the undersigned for the ISO as follows: 
 
Raymond W. Hepper 
Monica Gonzalez* 
ISO New England Inc. 
One Sullivan Road 
Holyoke, MA 01040-2841 
Tel:  (413) 535-4178 
Fax: (413) 535-4379 
Email: mgonzalez@iso-ne.com  
Howard H. Shafferman* 
Daniel R. Simon  
Ballard Spahr Andrews & Ingersoll, LLP 
601 13th Street, NW 
Suite 1000 South 
Washington, DC 20005-3807 
Tel:  (202) 661-2200 
Fax: (202) 661-2299 
Email: hhs@ballardspahr.com  
 
 
And to NEPOOL as follows: 
 
David T. Doot 
Eric K. Runge* 
Day, Berry & Howard LLP 
One International Place 
Boston, MA 02110 
Tel: (617) 345-4735 
Fax: (617) 345-4745 
Email: ekrunge@dbh.com 
  
*Persons designated for service. 
 
III.   
STANDARD OF REVIEW 
 
The ISO submits the Schedule 2 Amendments pursuant to Section 205 of the 
FPA, which “gives a utility the right to file rates and terms for services rendered with its 
assets.”5  Under Section 205, the Commission “plays ‘an essential passive and reactive’ 
role”6 whereby it “can reject [a filing] only if it finds that the changes proposed by the 
public utility are not “just and reasonable.”7  The Commission limits this inquiry “into 
whether the rates proposed by a utility are reasonable – and [this inquiring does not] 
extend to determining whether a proposed rate schedule is more or less reasonable than 
alternative rate designs.”8  The changes proposed herein “need not be the only reasonable 
                                                 
5 Atlantic City Elec. Co. v. FERC, 295 F.3d 1, 9 (D.C. Cir. 2002). 
 
6 Id. at 10 (quoting City of Winnfield v. FERC, 744 F.2d 871, 876 (D.C. Cir 1984). 
 
7 Id. 
 
8 See ISO New England Inc., 114 FERC ¶ 61,315 at P 33 and n.35 (2005), citing Pub. Serv. Co. of New 
Mexico v. FERC, 832 F.2d 1201, 1211 (10th Cir. 1987) and City of Bethany v. FERC, 727 F.2d 1131, 1136 
(D.C. Cir. 1984) (“City of Bethany”), cert. denied, 469 U.S. 917 (1984). 
Honorable Magalie R. Salas 
December 29, 2006 
Page 6 of 24 
 
 
DMEAST #9695005 v1 
methodology, or even the most accurate.”9  As a result, even if an intervenor or the 
Commission develops an alternate proposal, the Commission must accept the ISO’s 
Section 205 filing if it finds it is just and reasonable.10 
 
IV.   
BACKGROUND 
 
 
In order to maintain transmission voltages on the New England Transmission 
System within acceptable limits, generation facilities may be directed from time to time 
by the ISO, as the System Operator, to operate to produce or absorb reactive power.  
Schedule 2 of the OATT sets forth the rules that govern eligibility for compensation and 
payment for reactive power supply and voltage control service in New England.  To the 
extent a generation facility is directed by the ISO to produce or absorb reactive power, 
that facility is compensated under Schedule 2 for its provision of reactive power and for 
the energy costs associated with the reactive power provided.  A brief history of the 
development of Schedule 2 sets the framework for the Schedule 2 Amendments that are 
the subject of the instant filing.   
 
On December 31, 1996, NEPOOL filed a comprehensive restructuring proposal, 
which included the Restated NEPOOL Agreement and the NEPOOL Open Access 
Transmission Tariff (“NEPOOL Tariff”).11  Schedule 2 to the NEPOOL Tariff provided a 
formula for quantifying and recovering the costs of reactive power supply and voltage 
control from generation resources.  NEPOOL’s initial filing of Schedule 2 included a 
number of changes to the pro forma Order No. 888 OATT.  These changes were related 
to the rate design and payments for reactive power under Schedule 2.  The justness and 
reasonableness of Schedule 2, among other issues, was set for hearing pursuant to a 
Commission Order issued on April 20, 1998.12  The issues relating to Schedule 2, other 
than the calculation of a non-$0 CC component of the formula for compensation defined 
in Schedule 2, were resolved in a settlement agreement reached by the parties on April 5, 
1999, and approved by the Commission on July 30, 1999.13   
 
Pursuant to that settlement agreement, the costs for providing reactive power from 
generators in the NEPOOL Control Area are recovered exclusively through Schedule 2 of 
the NEPOOL Tariff and shared by transmission customers on a pro rata basis according 
                                                 
9 Oxy USA, Inc. v. FERC, 64 F.3d 679, 692 (D.C. Cir. 1995). 
 
10 Cf. Southern California Edison C o., et al., 73 FERC ¶ 61,219 at 61,608 n. 73 (1995) (“Having found the 
Plan to be just and reasonable, there is no need to consider in any detail the alternative plans proposed by 
the Joint Protesters.” (citing City of Bethany, 727 F.2d at 1136)). 
 
11 Prior to the February 1, 2005 implementation date for the New England RTO, NEPOOL had the filing 
rights for the NEPOOL OATT, which went into effect on March 1, 1997. 
 
12 New England Power Pool, 83 FERC ¶ 61,045 (1998).   
 
13 New England Power Pool, 88 FERC ¶ 61,140 (1999). 
Honorable Magalie R. Salas 
December 29, 2006 
Page 7 of 24 
 
 
DMEAST #9695005 v1 
to their shares of regional network load and reserved capacity for Through or Out 
Service.  As initially filed, Schedule 2 provided for reactive power compensation based 
on three cost components:  (1) the Lost Opportunity Cost (“LOC”) component, which 
compensates for the value of a generator’s lost opportunity in the energy market in 
situations in which a generator that would otherwise be economically dispatched as 
directed by the ISO to reduce real power output to provide more reactive power; (2) the 
cost of energy consumed (“SCL”) component, which compensates for the cost of energy 
consumed by a generator solely to provide reactive power support, such as the energy 
required to “motor” a hydroelectric generating unit; and (3) the CC component, which 
compensates for the fixed capital costs incurred by a generator associated with the 
installation and maintenance of the capability of providing reactive power.  The charge 
for the CC component was originally set at $0 to reflect an agreement among the parties.   
 
Subsequently, in 2001, NEPOOL further revised the compensation formula to 
include an additional component labeled “PC” and defined as “the portion of the amount 
paid to Market Participants for the hour for Energy produced by a generating unit that is 
considered under [Schedule 2] to be paid for VAR support.”14  The PC charges address 
the circumstances where a generator that was not economically dispatched is directed to 
come on line or increase power above its economic loading point to provide reactive 
power.  This component compensates the generator for the difference between the 
locational marginal price (“LMP”) and its offer price, if the LMP is lower than the offer 
price, for each hour the generator provides reactive power.15  Also, in 2001, NEPOOL 
filed its Seventy-Third Agreement Amending the Restated NEPOOL Agreement 
(“Seventy-Third Agreement”) amending the CC component that was originally set at $0 
to allow for a non-$0 charge, which would compensate a “Qualified Generator” for 
maintaining a generator’s capability to provide reactive power support.16  In that filing, 
NEPOOL also described the calculations for each of the elements of the Schedule 2 rate 
design.   
 
The existing rate design under Schedule 2 of the OATT consists of the same 
elements described in the Seventy-Third Amendment filing – the fixed CC component 
                                                 
14 This revision to the Schedule 2 formula was directed by the Commission by order dated June 28, 2000, 
Docket Nos. EL00-62-000, et al., ISO New England Inc., 91 FERC ¶ 61,311 (2000) (“CSM/MSS Order”), 
and subsequently approved on June 13, 2001 in ISO New England Inc., 95 FERC ¶ 61,384 (2001). 
 
15 On April 27, 2001, NEPOOL filed the Seventy-Second Agreement Amending the Restated NEPOOL 
Agreement (“Seventy-Second Agreement”), which proposed conforming changes in light of a order issued 
by the Commission on April 26, 2001, accepting market rule changes implementing three-part bidding and 
net commitment period compensation (“NCPC”) in the NEPOOL Control Area.  New England Power Pool, 
95 FERC ¶ 61,123 (2001).  The NCPC methodology approved by the Commission applied to the 
calculation of the PC charge component of Schedule 2.  The Commission accepted the Seventy-Second 
Amendment in an unpublished letter order issued on June 1, 2001, in Docket No. ER01-1891-000. 
 
16 This Agreement was accepted by the Commission in an unpublished letter order issued on June 28, 2001, 
in Docket No. ER01-2161-000.   
 
Honorable Magalie R. Salas 
December 29, 2006 
Page 8 of 24 
 
 
DMEAST #9695005 v1 
and the variable components of LOC, SCL and PC.  As described in the Seventy-Third 
Amendment, Schedule 2 of the OATT compensates “Qualified Generators” for the 
equipment needed to provide VAR Service as directed by the ISO.  Such compensation, 
however, is based on the lagging capability provided only by such “Qualified 
Generators,” defined as “any generator that is in the Market System and provides 
measurable voltage support, as determined from time to time by the ISO to the New 
England Control Area.”  Non-generator dynamic reactive power sources are not eligible 
for compensation under Schedule 2.  Moreover, the charge paid under the CC component 
reflects a negotiated rate based on the carrying costs associated with generator reactive 
power equipment owned by transmission owners in 1998 and has not been updated to 
account for changes in the cost-basis or mix of reactive resources now available and 
providing reactive support in New England.17      
 
V.   
DESCRIPTION OF THE SCHEDULE 2 AMENDMENTS  
 
 
The proposed Schedule 2 Amendments include the modifications to Schedule 2 of 
the OATT as approved by the Participants Committee.  As further described below, the 
Schedule 2 Amendments:  (1) expand eligibility for payment under Schedule 2 to non-
generator dynamic reactive power resources; (2) make eligibility criteria clear for all 
dynamic reactive power resources; (3) update the CC rate from $1.05/kVAR-year (the 
current amount paid under the CC rate) to $2.32/kVAR-year to account for changes in the 
cost-basis or mix of reactive resources in New England since 1998; (4) use both leading 
and lagging VAR capability to determine the CC component payments; and (5) identify an 
alternative means under the OATT by which a non-generator dynamic reactive power 
resources can receive compensation if it does not elect to recover its costs under Schedule 
2.     
 
A.  Proposed Changes to Eligibility Requirements for Compensation  
 
1. Expanding Compensation Eligibility to Include Qualified Non-
Generator Reactive Resources 
 
Based on the fact that non-generator dynamic reactive power devices are capable 
of providing reactive power support to the New England Transmission System, the ISO 
and NEPOOL submit that eligibility for compensation under Schedule 2 should be 
broadened to include such resources that have dynamic reactive power capability, meet 
certain specific eligibility requirements, and are not being compensated for the capability 
elsewhere.  Currently, only “Qualified Generators” are eligible for reactive power 
compensation under Schedule 2.  The largest, current single example of a non-generator 
dynamic reactive power resource is the Cross-Sound Cable, but other facilities may well 
qualify. 
                                                 
17 See Transmittal Letter of the Seventy-Third Agreement at 7 (describing the Base CC Rate values as “a 
series of negotiated rates based on a number of estimates of the carrying costs per kVAR to generators 
associated with the equipment to provide VAR support”).      
Honorable Magalie R. Salas 
December 29, 2006 
Page 9 of 24 
 
 
DMEAST #9695005 v1 
Specifically, the Schedule 2 Amendments incorporate a new term – “Qualified 
Non-Generator Reactive Resource” – defined in Section I (Definitions) as “any non-
generator source of dynamic reactive power that meets the criteria specified in Section II 
of the revised Schedule 2.”  Additionally, proposed Section II.B sets forth the criteria that 
reflect necessary conditions, which include:   
 
1. the entity owning or controlling the reactive power capability of the non-
generator reactive power resource is a Market Participant; 
 
2. the non-generator reactive power equipment provides measurable dynamic 
reactive power voltage support to the New England Transmission System, as 
determined from time-to-time by the ISO; 
 
3. the type of dynamic reactive power equipment is within a category of reactive 
power equipment that has been approved by the ISO, with advisory input from 
the Reliability Committee; 
 
4. the dynamic reactive power equipment is subject to the operating authority of 
the ISO and all necessary operating protocols for provision of reactive power 
voltage support from such equipment have been agreed to, in writing, between 
the ISO and the non-generator reactive power resource; 
 
5. such equipment is interconnected to the New England Transmission System 
and metered and dispatchable by the ISO or otherwise subject to operational 
control by the ISO, and has its automatic voltage regulator status and control 
mode (including power factor, reactive power output and voltage control) 
telemetered to the ISO and the applicable Local Control Center; provided that 
the non-generator reactive resource shall have until January 1, 2009 to have 
the necessary telemetering equipment installed and operating;  
 
6. the non-generator reactive resource meets the reactive power testing 
requirements applicable to such non-generators, as determined from time-
to-time by the ISO and specified in the ISO New England Operating 
Documents; and 
 
7. the installation of such equipment shall have been approved in accordance 
with the requirements of Section I.3.9 of the Tariff or its predecessor 
provisions under the New England regional transmission arrangements.  
       
Moreover, Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resources will be eligible to 
receive the same fixed CC rate as generator resources.  The application of the non-CC 
elements of the Schedule 2 rate design – lost opportunity cost, cost of consumed energy, 
and cost of energy produced – to Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resources, however, 
will be determined on a case-by-case basis, and subject to filings being made pursuant to 
Honorable Magalie R. Salas 
December 29, 2006 
Page 10 of 24 
 
 
DMEAST #9695005 v1 
Section 205 of the Federal Power Act, at the time the particular category of equipment is 
approved for compensation under Schedule 2.   
 
Since Schedule 2 may not appropriately compensate (a) a non-operating, non-
dispatchable generator that functions as a synchronous condenser and (b) an operating 
generator that utilizes a clutch device to operate as both a real power generator and a 
synchronous condenser, Section VI of Schedule 2 permits a separate schedule and filing 
for compensation of the first type of resource.  Schedule 2 does not provide separate 
treatment for operating generators that utilize a clutch device to operate as both a real 
power generator and a synchronous condenser because of potential market rule and 
operational impacts.  If alternative treatment is warranted, changes will be examined by 
the ISO and NEPOOL through the stakeholder process.  Until the time that alternative 
treatment is determined and filed, operating generators that have the ability to utilize a 
clutch device to operate as both a real power generator and a synchronous condenser will 
receive Schedule 2 compensation based on its generator reactive capability only. 
 
2. Clarification of Eligibility Criteria Applicable to All Dynamic 
Reactive Power Sources 
 
Schedule 2 is amended to memorialize and clarify the criteria for new generator 
eligibility for CC Rate payments.  Currently, Section II.1.1 of Schedule 2 defines a 
“Qualified Generator” as “any generator that is in the Market System and provides 
measurable voltage support, as determined from time to time by the ISO to the New 
England Control Area.”  As with Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resources, the 
proposed amendments to Schedule 2 provide specific criteria that new generators must 
satisfy to be eligible for CC Rate payments under Schedule 2.   
 
The Schedule 2 Amendments include a new Section II.A, which sets forth the 
criteria that new generators that elect to join the Schedule 2 program after June 1, 2007 
(i.e., “Qualified Generator Reactive Resources” also defined in Section I, Definitions) 
must meet in order to qualify for CC Rate payments under Schedule 2.  The criteria are as 
follows: 
 
1. the entity owning or controlling the reactive power capability of the generator 
reactive resource is a Market Participant;  
 
2. the generator is: (a) interconnected to the New England Transmission System 
or (b) interconnected to the distribution system but participating in the New 
England Markets and (c) is metered and dispatchable by the ISO or otherwise 
subject to operational control by the ISO;  
 
3. the generator provides measurable reactive power voltage support to the New 
England Transmission System, as determined from time-to-time by the ISO, 
and has its automatic voltage regulator status and control mode (including 
Honorable Magalie R. Salas 
December 29, 2006 
Page 11 of 24 
 
 
DMEAST #9695005 v1 
power factor, reactive power output and voltage control) telemetered to the 
ISO and the applicable Local Control Center; provided that the generator shall 
have until January 1, 2009 to have the necessary telemetering equipment 
installed and operating;  
 
4. the generator meets the reactive power testing requirements applicable to 
generators, as determined from time-to-time by the ISO and specified in the 
ISO New England Operating Documents; and  
 
5. the installation of the generator shall have been approved in accordance with 
the requirements of Section I.3.9 of the Tariff or its predecessor or successor 
provisions under the New England regional transmission arrangements. 
  
These criteria apply to new or existing generators that are not in the program as of June 1, 
2007 that elect to join the Schedule 2 program after June 1, 2007.  Any generator that is 
receiving “VAR Payments”18 under Schedule 2 on June 1, 2007 shall be deemed to be 
a Qualified Generator Reactive Resource as of that date, provided that it continues to 
meet the criteria specified in (1), (3) and (4), above and meets certain informational 
requirements of the ISO as specified in the Schedule 2 Amendments.  As is currently 
the case, under the Schedule 2 Amendments any generator that is run by the ISO to 
provide reactive power support to the New England Transmission System will be paid its 
variable costs in accordance with the non-CC Rate components of Schedule 2.   
 
B.  Proposed Changes to Compensation for VAR Services  
 
1. Elements of the Schedule 2 Rate Design 
 
The existing rate design for reactive power compensation consists of four 
components – the capacity cost (“CC”), lost opportunity cost (“LOC”), cost of energy 
consumed (“SCL”), and cost of energy produced (“PC”).  Under the proposed 
amendments, the existing elements of the Schedule 2 rate design remain intact.  The 
proposed expansion of Schedule 2 eligibility to include non-generator dynamic resources 
does not require any changes to the components of the compensation formula as currently 
approved.  However, each element has been expanded to apply to both generators and 
non-generator dynamic reactive power sources, as appropriate.  Importantly, and as fully 
explained below, the existing rate design and the rate paid under the CC component 
(currently, $1.05/kVAR-year) are being modified and updated.  Finally, as a matter of 
terminology, the acronyms for the cost of energy consumed and cost of energy produced 
have been modified, respectively, to “CEC” and “CEP” to avoid confusion regarding the 
meaning of these acronyms.   
 
                                                 
18 The Schedule 2 Amendments provide a new definition of “VAR Payments” – “the payment made to 
Qualified Reactive Resources for VAR Service Capability under Section V.A of this Schedule 2” – in 
Section I, Definitions.     
Honorable Magalie R. Salas 
December 29, 2006 
Page 12 of 24 
 
 
DMEAST #9695005 v1 
2. Proposed Revisions to the CC Component  
 
a. Revisions to Update the Rate Paid Under the CC 
Component 
 
With regard to the CC component, the VWG played an important role in updating 
the rate paid under this component to account for changes in the cost-basis or mix of 
reactive resources in the New England since 1998.  As provided in Section II.1.4 of 
Schedule 2, the current CC Rate is $1.05/kVAR-year, which is based upon pre-1998 cost 
data, and further resulted from a negotiated settlement.  The VWG considered a number 
of different means of updating the CC component, including developing unit-specific 
revenue requirements as well as using the so-called “AEP methodology”19 applied to a 
proxy unit.  Ultimately, the VWG recommended updating the CC Rate through a 
negotiated rate based on a weighted-average blend of the costs of older generators in New 
England and the costs of newer generators as reflected in the AEP methodology filings in 
PJM Interconnection, LLC (“PJM”).  The VWG recommended that the ratio for the blend 
of those costs would be two-thirds to one-third, which would reflect the approximate ratio 
of megawatts of pre-market generation (roughly 20,000 MWs) and added post-market 
generation (roughly 10,000 MWs) currently existing in New England.20   
 
In order to calculate the updated CC Rate using this blended approach, the VWG 
had to obtain data for pre- and post-market generation.  The data used for the pre-market 
(i.e., pre-1998) generation was already available as it was used to develop the current CC 
revenue requirement, as described in NEPOOL’s Seventy-Third Agreement.  The cost-
based average revenue requirement of those generators was $1.38/kVAR-year. 21  Most of 
the new generation that has been added in New England is combined cycle gas-fired 
technology, and because it has been built under a market regime and not under a cost-of-
service regime, cost data related to the generators was not easily accessible.  A sub-group 
of the VWG, however, was able to gather data from AEP methodology filings made by 
generators in PJM since 2000.22  Using data from this set of generators is reasonable, 
                                                 
19 See American Electric Power Service Corporation, 88 FERC ¶ 61,141 (1999) (the initial case 
establishing the “AEP methodology”).  The AEP methodology determines the cost of the generator, exciter 
and step-up transformer, allocates a portion to VAR capability and levelizes that cost over the life of the 
unit to get a VAR cost of service rate. 
 
20 The competitive bid-based markets commenced in New England in 1998.  A substantial amount of new 
generation started to be built beginning in 1998. 
 
21 See Transmittal Letter of Seventy-Third Agreement at 7 (describing the agreed-upon value for the CC 
charge). 
 
22 The data compiled by the sub-group of the VWG is appended herein behind Attachment 3.  While this 
data is based on generators in PJM, the use of this data as a proxy for the costs of newer generators is 
reasonable because the generators are a similar vintage and technology, and in most cases have the same 
manufacturer as the majority of the post-market generators in New England; and (2) the revenue 
requirement numbers had undergone scrutiny through the FERC approval process.    
Honorable Magalie R. Salas 
December 29, 2006 
Page 13 of 24 
 
 
DMEAST #9695005 v1 
because:  (1) the generators are a similar vintage and technology (i.e., post-1998 
combined cycle gas-fired generators), and in most cases have the same manufacturer as 
the majority of the post-market generators in New England; and (2) the revenue 
requirement numbers had undergone scrutiny through the FERC approval process.  The 
rate calculated for the average revenue requirement for those generators is $4.20/kVAR-
year.  Using a blend of the pre- and post-market generation resulted in a blended revenue 
requirement of $2.32/kVAR-year or ((2 * $1.38) + $4.20) /3 = $2.32.   
 
Assuming that the current qualified generator reactive resource mix stays constant 
and Cross Sound Cable receives CC payments in 2007, it is estimated that the impact of 
increasing the CC Rate from $1.05 kVAR-year to $2.32 kVAR-year will increase the 
total Schedule 2 fixed payments in the second half of 2007 from roughly $1.015 
million/month (which equates to $12.2 million/year) to roughly $2.3 million/month 
(which equates $27.3 million/year).23   
 
The Schedule 2 Amendments incorporate the blended rate of $2.32/kVAR-year in 
new Section V.4 of Schedule 2, which provides the cost components for Qualified 
Reactive Resource’s Payments, previously provided in Section II of Schedule 2.  This 
blended rate of $2.32/kVAR-year on a net lagging basis is reasonable when compared to 
the numbers from the pre-market generation in New England and the post-2000 
combined cycle, gas-fired generators from PJM.  Further, the use of this approach 
provides the same benefits of simplicity and avoidance of administrative burden or 
regulatory litigation as would the use of a proxy unit, while at the same time being 
grounded in reasonable cost data for the reactive power equipment.24  In addition, new 
Section V.4 provides for the updated CC Rate to remain in effect for five years and to be 
revisited near the end of the five years to determine whether another adjustment to the 
rate is appropriate then in light of any changes to the mix of reactive resources in New 
England, especially, as new generators are added or older generators are retired. 
 
One issue that surfaced during the development of the updated CC Rate was how 
payment of the CC Rate should be reconciled with payments to generators under the 
Forward Capacity Market (“FCM”) when it is fully implemented at the end of the 
transition period (i.e., 2010) such that there would not be any double payment.  ISO and 
NEPOOL have agreed that any measures needed to ensure that there will not be such 
double payment will be addressed in the development of the final FCM rules rather than 
through new provisions in Schedule 2 of the OATT. 
                                                 
23 A spreadsheet containing the historical Schedule 2 VAR costs over a twelve-month period used to 
calculate the impact of increasing the CC Rate from $1.05/kVAR-year to $2.32/kVAR-year is included 
herein behind Attachment 4. 
 
24 See Transmittal Letter of Seventy-Third Agreement at 7 (describing the use of an agreed-upon proxy 
value – the Base VAR Rate – for defining the carrying costs associated with providing capability for VAR 
Support as administratively efficient and simple).  As noted above, the Commission accepted the Seventy-
Third Agreement in an unpublished letter order issued on June 28, 2001, in Docket No. ER01-2161-000. 
Honorable Magalie R. Salas 
December 29, 2006 
Page 14 of 24 
 
 
DMEAST #9695005 v1 
b. Application of the CC Rate Over the Full Range of Leading 
and Lagging Capability 
 
The Schedule 2 Amendments include proposed revisions to Schedule 2 to allow 
the application of the CC payment over the full range of a reactive power resource’s 
leading and lagging capability.  As described in more detail below and as reflected in new 
Section V.4 of Schedule 2, such revisions also will provide an incentive to reactive 
resources to test in both the leading and lagging mode.  Currently under Schedule 2, 
generators are compensated for their VAR capability based on lagging capability only, 
which is physically determined by testing the lagging VAR capability of each generator.  
The proposed amendments are structured to ensure that the total of the leading and 
lagging payments equal the general CC component rate of $2.32/kVAR-year which, as 
further discussed below, is initially to be paid solely on a net lagging basis.  
 
Establishing a CC payment that is based on both leading and lagging capability 
provides (a) reactive resources the incentive to perform VAR tests to prove their leading 
and lagging capability, and (b) the ISO and the Local Control Centers with actual 
operational-based VAR resource data that can be used to more accurately support the 
planning and real-time operation of the transmission system.  Attaching the CC Rate 
compensation mechanism to the VAR testing requirement (and associated test results) 
provides a number of additional benefits that the VAR testing requirement by itself will 
not accomplish.  Some of the primary benefits of attaching the CC Rate compensation 
mechanism to the VAR testing criteria are: 
 
1. Such criteria provide additional incentive to the owners of the dynamic 
reactive resources to perform both the leading and lagging VAR tests.  
(Knowing that CC Rate compensation is based on the leading and lagging 
test results provides the financial incentive to the generator owner to test in 
both the lead and the lag to the best of the resource’s abilities). 
 
2. The testing recognizes the dynamic reactive resources’ strengths or 
weaknesses related to its ability to produce and absorb VARs and then bases 
the compensation on the entire voltage control range.  To the extent that a 
dynamic reactive resource can produce and absorb VARs the CC Rate will 
fairly compensate the resource for its actual leading and lagging 
capabilities.25   
 
                                                 
25 For example, if a facility, based on its testing results, has the ability to produce many VARs (e.g., 210 
MVAR Lag), but cannot absorb many VARs (e.g., 75 MVAR), the resource will be paid for 285 MVAR.  
If the testing requirement is maintained, but the tie to compensation is removed, the sum of the incentive 
that encourages the resource to prove to what extent it can really produce or absorb VARs is removed. 
 
Honorable Magalie R. Salas 
December 29, 2006 
Page 15 of 24 
 
 
DMEAST #9695005 v1 
3. Applying the testing criteria results in payment for what the dynamic 
reactive resources can actually produce or absorb, rather than what the 
dynamic reactive resources might be able to perform as provided on paper. 
 
4. As a result of testing, the ISO and the Local Control Centers have more 
accurate data to support planning and real-time operations. 
 
To properly implement VAR compensation for leading and lagging capability and 
tie the VAR compensation mechanism to the VAR testing requirement, there needs to be 
a conversion of the Base CC Rate, which is calculated based upon lagging values, into an 
Adjusted CC Rate that recognizes both leading and lagging VAR capability within the 
program, and maintains a revenue distribution consistent with what the resources would 
have been paid under the Base CC Rate times their lagging VAR capability.  The 
conversion of the Base CC Rate to the Adjusted CC Rate maintains the Base CC Rate and 
its lagging capability determinants as the foundation of the Adjusted CC Rate calculation.  
The Adjusted CC Rate calculation then modifies the Base CC Rate into a blended rate 
that recognizes the leading and lagging MVARs of the dynamic reactive resources in the 
Schedule 2 program in a manner such that – if one were to take the composite resource 
that was reflected in the Base CC Rate calculation and compensate it based on either (a) 
the Base CC Rate times its lagging capability or (b) the Adjusted CC Rate times its 
lagging and leading capability – the resulting payment would be about the same.  This 
calculation results in a comparable distribution of Adjusted CC Rate compensation to that 
which would have been paid under a straight Base CC Rate compensation mechanism, 
which is already in place under the current Schedule 2. 
 
The conversion of the “Base CC Rate” -- $2.32/kVAR-year – into an Adjusted 
CC Rate, expressed in the form of $kVAR/year, representing the amount to be paid for 
leading and lagging capability, is set forth in Section V.4 of Schedule 2.    As further 
described in the Schedule 2 VAR Implementation Rule, which, as indicated above, will 
be added to Schedule 2 of the OATT, 26 the CC rate conversion methodology that was 
developed to allow for the payment of both leading and lagging capability converts the 
Base CC Rate of $2.32/kVAR-year into a “blended lead/lag” rate (the Adjusted CC Rate) 
on an annual basis.  The “blended lead/lag” rate recognizes the tested dynamic reactive 
resources capability as inputs, and applies an increase/decrease limiter during a three-year 
transition period to avoid drastic changes in annual rate caused by a rush of recognized 
MVARs into or out of the program. 
 
As proposed in Section V.3, the Adjusted CC Rate will be calculated in 
accordance with the following formula:  Adjusted CC Rate (CCRateadjusted) shall equal: 
                                                 
26 The Schedule 2 VAR Payment Implementation Rule describes the basis for each element of the Adjusted 
CC Rate formula and the methodology for the calculation.  As proposed in Section V.5, the details of the 
Schedule 2 VAR Implementation Rule may be modified by the ISO without a further filing under the FPA 
provided that such modifications are consistent with the requirements of Schedule 2, and are supported by 
at least two-thirds of the voting percentage of the Transmission Committee members. 
Honorable Magalie R. Salas 
December 29, 2006 
Page 16 of 24 
 
 
DMEAST #9695005 v1 
(the Base CC Rate (CCRatebase) * Current Total Aggregate lagging VARs) / (Current 
Total Aggregate Lagging VARs + Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs).  The 
Total Aggregate Leading and Lagging VAR values reflect the untested and tested 
values of all dynamic reactive resources that are in the program at the beginning of 
each calendar year.  During the first three years of the program, the dynamic reactive 
resources that are currently in the program will be required to have completed leading 
and lagging VAR tests.  As dynamic reactive resources that are added to the program 
will have one calendar year to perform both leading and lagging VAR tests, by the 
end of the transition period in year three, almost every dynamic reactive resource will 
have performed both leading and lagging VAR tests.  At that point the only dynamic 
reactive resources that would not have tested would be those resources that joined the 
VAR program in year three of the transition period.   
 
There is a concern that the addition or removal of too many dynamic reactive 
resources into or out of the VAR program in any one year would cause a dramatic change 
in the Adjusted CC Rate calculation.  In addition, if all dynamic reactive resources were 
to fail to test in one direction (e.g., the leading direction) then the resulting Adjusted CC 
Rate would be based solely on lagging capability and result in a value of $2.32/kVAR-
year.  This would result in a number of things, particularly: (a) only compensating 
dynamic reactive resources for their one side of their VAR capability (in the example, 
lagging capability); (b) providing a disincentive of resources in the program to fully test 
their VAR capability in the other direction (in the example, in the leading direction); and 
(c) providing a disincentive to new dynamic reactive resources to join the program (in the 
example, new resources that have primarily leading VAR capability).  To restrict this 
from occurring and to maintain payment incentives if there were to be a withdrawal of 
VAR capability primarily in one direction, increase and decrease limiters are applied to 
the Adjusted CC Rate calculation.  These limiters mitigate the potential impact of major 
increases or decreases of VAR capability within the program during the three-year 
transition period and afterwards.  The extent by which these limiters can impact the 
Adjusted CC Rate calculation is more restrictive during the transition period as compared 
to how they are applied afterwards. 
 
c. Inclusion of Non-Generator Reactive Resources in the 
Measurement of the CC Rate Payment Cap  
 
Currently, Section II.1.3 of Schedule 2 provides a megawatt-based CC Rate 
Payment Cap that is applied to the annual CC Rate at the beginning of the year on a 
prospective basis for that calendar year.  The CC Rate Payment Cap formula does not 
need to be revised to accommodate the inclusion of non-generator reactive power 
sources, but the measured total capability of the system should be based on both 
generators and non-generator dynamic reactive power sources, and MVARs of the non-
generator sources should be converted to MWs.  The Schedule 2 Amendments include 
this change in proposed Section V.7 of Schedule 2.  As that section provides, a “Qualified 
Non-Generator Reactive Resource’s Seasonal Claimed Capability” shall be calculated by 
Honorable Magalie R. Salas 
December 29, 2006 
Page 17 of 24 
 
 
DMEAST #9695005 v1 
taking 2.5 times the maximum dynamic reactive power capability on a lagging basis 
demonstrated by the Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resource during the testing of its 
VAR Service capability consistent with ISO New England Operating Procedures for 
measurement of such capability.     
 
C.  Proposed Revisions to Operational Procedures and Requirements 
 
The appropriate operational and testing rules associated with reactive supply and 
voltage control will be amended to incorporate the other changes proposed herein.  
Currently, Schedule 2 provides for “Qualified Generators” to receive a “VAR Payment,” 
which equals the “VAR Rate” multiplied by the Qualified Generator’s “Qualified 
VARs.”  The Qualified VARs is a Generator’s actual lagging VAR capability at its point 
of delivery to the New England Transmission System.  The Qualified VARs for each 
Qualified Generator are determined through a testing process, the details of which are set 
forth in ISO New England Operating Procedures.  Currently, this testing process only 
evaluates a Qualified Generator’s lagging VAR capability.  Accordingly, the “lagging 
only” VAR testing program will be replaced with an expanded test that includes 
generators and non-generator dynamic reactive resources and a leading VAR capability 
test.27  This expanded reactive resource testing program will recognize the current 
lagging VAR testing mechanism requirements as well as the recently issued NERC 
standard requiring generators to prove their reactive control capability, which becomes 
effective on January 1, 2007.28   
 
The operational and business procedures dealing with reactive supply and voltage 
control will be amended to ensure that a non-generator reactive resource operates its 
reactive power equipment with automatic voltage regulator (“AVR”) or other similar 
equipment that ensures dynamic response to system voltage needs.29  The Schedule 2 
Amendments include metering requirements for AVR telemetering to the ISO and Local 
Control Center control rooms as one of the criteria that must be satisfied by January 1, 
2009 for any reactive resource to be deemed (or continue to be deemed) a “Qualified 
Reactive Resource.”   
 
D.  Proposed Implementation of Schedule 2 Amendments 
 
In order to accommodate the functionalities reflected in the Schedule 2 
Amendments, the software and business processes associated with VAR compensation 
under Schedule 2 will require extensive revisions.  For instance, the implementation of 
the Schedule 2 Amendments will require:  (1) recognition of newly included non-
generator dynamic reactive power resources as registered assets within the ISO system; 
                                                 
27 The applicable ISO New England Operating Procedures are referenced in Section V.10 of Schedule 2. 
 
28 NERC Standard MOD-025-1 “Verification of Generator Gross and Net Reactive Power Capability.” 
 
29 The applicable ISO New England Operating Procedures are referenced in Section II of Schedule 2. 
Honorable Magalie R. Salas 
December 29, 2006 
Page 18 of 24 
 
 
DMEAST #9695005 v1 
(2) revisions to the associated business processes within ISO Settlements and System 
Operations; (3) modification of the ISO-developed stand-alone software that supports the 
administration and billing of VAR Services under Schedule 2; (4) inclusion of AVR 
telemetered data within the ISO control room; and (5) development and administration of 
the expanded VAR testing program.  These changes also will require the availability of 
new data and likely require revisions or replacement of the current ISO-developed stand-
alone software supporting the administration, including dynamic reactive resource testing 
and billing, of VAR Services under Schedule 2.  Such revisions will implicate many of 
the ISO departments, primarily impacting the Customer Service, System Operations, 
System Operation Support, Settlements, Audit and IT departments.   
 
Because the ISO’s IT, system and market development personnel are currently 
engaged in the implementation of other important, large-impact projects with fixed 
deadlines,30 the ISO proposed, and the stakeholders agreed to, a phased-in approach for 
the implementation of the Schedule 2 Amendments.  Under this transition schedule, upon 
the effective date of the changes to Schedule 2 (i.e., March 1, 2007), Cross Sound Cable 
will become eligible to receive payment of the CC Rate under the currently effective rate 
of $1.05/kVAR-year provided that Cross Sound Cable has met all of the eligibility 
criteria specified in new Section II.B of Schedule 2 at that time.  Commencing June 1, 
2007, the ISO will apply the updated Base CC Rate ($2.32/kVAR-year) to payments for 
Qualified Reactive Resources’ (including Cross Sound Cable) lagging capability, as is 
currently the case under Schedule 2.  The ISO then will apply the Adjusted CC Rate to 
compensate resources for the full leading and lagging range of the VAR capability 
commencing January 1, 2008, which is the earliest date by which the ISO expects system 
changes to track leading VAR capability to be implemented.  Other non-generator 
dynamic reactive resources will be eligible for VAR payments commencing January 1, 
2008.  
 
The Schedule 2 Amendments revise Schedule 2 to reflect the following phased-in 
implementation schedule:   
 
• March 1, 2007 – Cross Sound Cable will be accepted into the program as a 
Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resource eligible for the CC rate 
payment provided that it has satisfied all criteria specified in Section II.B, 
including a requirement that operating protocols for provision of reactive 
power voltage support from such equipment have been agreed to, in 
writing, between the ISO and the Cross Sound Cable operator. 
                                                 
30 These include:  (1) the completion of the market rules and supporting design for the Forward Capacity 
Market settlement both for the transition period by December, 2006, and the long-term market by February, 
2007; (2) developing an implementation proposal for Long-Term Firm Transmission Rights in compliance 
with the Commission’s Final Rule issued in Order No. 681 by January, 2007; and (3) the implementation of 
Appendix H of the Market Rule 1 implementation, Winter Readiness project, pricing of external nodes, 
combined cycle modeling and implementation of new Daylight Savings Time measures in system, which 
are scheduled for implementation over the next several months.   
Honorable Magalie R. Salas 
December 29, 2006 
Page 19 of 24 
 
 
DMEAST #9695005 v1 
• June 1, 2007 – The Base CC Rate will increase from $1.05/kVAR-year to 
$2.32/kVAR-year for the lagging capabilities of all dynamic reactive 
resources that have been accepted into the program.  At this time, the ISO 
will also initiate the formal testing for leading capabilities; that is, all 
generators seeking to be paid under Schedule 2 will be required to provide 
the appropriate data necessary to test for leading capability and the first set 
of generators will perform leading capability tests during the 2007 leading 
capability test period. 
 
• January 1, 2008 – The Adjusted Base CC Rate will be modified to reflect 
leading and lagging capability.  Also, on this date, all other non-generator 
dynamic reactive resources that have demonstrated their compliance with 
the eligibility criteria established in Section II.B will be eligible to receive 
the CC payment under Schedule 2.        
 
VI. 
STAKEHOLDER PROCESS 
 
A. Review of the Rules Governing Eligibility and Compensation for Reactive 
Power in New England  
 
In December 2004, the Transmission Committee established the VWG to review 
the rules in New England governing the provision of reactive power and voltage support, 
including eligibility of resources, compensation and testing to recommend whether those 
rules should change and, if so, how they should change.  Per the Transmission 
Committee’s directive, the VWG conducted an in-depth review of:  (1) the use of reactive 
power in New England; (2) what resources should be eligible for compensation; (3) how 
eligible resources are compensated now under the ISO OATT; (4) how, if at all, such 
compensation should change; (5) how reactive power costs should be allocated; and (6) 
the appropriate operational and testing rules associated with items 1-5 above.31   
 
 
On April 25, 2006, the VWG presented to the Transmission Committee its 
recommendations with respect to each of the issues numbered above for potential 
modifications to Schedule 2 of the OATT.  Following the VWG’s presentation, the 
Transmission Committee requested that the VWG recommend potential modifications to 
Schedule 2 consistent with its recommendations.  The Schedule 2 Amendments reflect 
the recommendations of the VWG, as discussed in Section IV above. 
 
                                                 
31 The VWG held monthly meetings from January 2005 to April 2006 to review and develop 
recommendations with respect to the rules governing eligibility for reactive power compensation in New 
England.  These meetings were well-attended by representatives of the various sectors of NEPOOL 
Participants,  representatives of the ISO, state regulatory staff, reactive power equipment developers and 
other interested persons. 
 
Honorable Magalie R. Salas 
December 29, 2006 
Page 20 of 24 
 
 
DMEAST #9695005 v1 
B. NEPOOL Support for the Schedule 2 Amendments 
 
The Schedule 2 Amendments reflect the overwhelming support of the NEPOOL 
Participants in New England.  At its September 19, 2006 meeting, the Transmission 
Committee voted approximately 93% in favor, with no abstentions, to recommend 
Participants Committee support for the filing of the Schedule 2 Amendments.  At that 
time, the Schedule 2 Amendments did not include an implementation schedule.  At its 
October 13, 2006 meeting, the Participants Committee voted approximately 88% in 
support of filing the Schedule 2 Amendments, subject to further recommendation by the 
Transmission Committee on a specific implementation schedule for the amendments to 
Schedule 2 and further Participants Committee action on the recommendations.  In 
response, the ISO worked with the Transmission Committee in developing an 
implementation schedule for the Schedule 2 Amendments.  That implementation 
schedule, as reflected in the Schedule 2 Amendments, was unanimously supported by the 
Transmission Committee, and subsequently by the Participants Committee.   
 
While the Schedule 2 Amendments reflect the overwhelming support of the 
Participants in New England, two areas of disagreement remain that warrant some 
discussion.  The first area of disagreement is whether generators should be paid the CC 
Rate for VARs produced between a power factor range of 0.95 leading and 0.95 lagging.  
The vast majority of NEPOOL Participants expressed the view that they want to maintain 
the status quo under Schedule 2 and provide payment to generators for the VAR 
capability within this power factor range, recognizing that even if interconnected 
generators are required by way of their interconnection agreements to operate within this 
range to control voltage they should still be compensated for the reactive power they 
provide.  The proponents of the change, however, proposed to recognize a generator’s 
interconnection agreement requirements by applying a “deadband” in this power factor 
range for which generators would not be able to receive payment (the “CC Rate 
Deadband Proposal”), arguing that generators should not be paid for providing a service 
they have to provide as a requirement of interconnection to the system.  Each of these 
proposals was considered by the Transmission Committee at its September 19, 2006 
meeting.  The existing CC Rate proposal contained in the Schedule 2 Amendments 
received approximately 85% support and the CC Rate Deadband Proposal received 
approximately 16% support.32  
 
The second area of disagreement among the Participants involved the allocation 
of Schedule 2 costs to entities who utilize Schedule 2 services.  Currently, reactive power 
payments under Schedule 2 are paid for by all regional transmission customers (i.e., 
regional network load and reserved capacity for Through or Out Service).  As briefly 
noted above, this method has been in effect since 1999, and is the same allocation used 
for non-generator dynamic reactive resources that are owned by the Participating 
                                                 
32 The CC Rate Deadband Proposal was also presented at the October 13, 2006 Participants Committee 
meeting and failed to receive Participants Committee support as reflected by a show of hands vote. 
Honorable Magalie R. Salas 
December 29, 2006 
Page 21 of 24 
 
 
DMEAST #9695005 v1 
Transmission Owners and recovered through regional transmission rates.  In its review, 
the VWG considered two alternatives for the allocation of Schedule 2 costs:  (1) to keep 
the current Commission-approved method of allocating Schedule 2 costs to all regional 
transmission customers; or (2) to change the cost allocation so that the CC component 
costs would be allocated under the current method to all transmission customers but the 
variable costs under Schedule 2  (i.e., the lost opportunity cost, cost of energy produced 
and cost of energy consumed) would be allocated on a localized basis to transmission 
customers within the Reliability Region(s) where voltage support is required – the 
“Reliability Region Cost Allocation Proposal.”33  The latter alternative to localize some 
costs was considered by the Transmission Committee at the September 19 meeting, but 
only obtained support of 45% in a straw poll,34 whereas the former alternative to maintain 
the status quo for cost allocation received supermajority support.35       
 
VII.   REQUESTED EFFECTIVE DATE 
 
 
The ISO and NEPOOL request that the Commission accept the Schedule 2 
Amendments as reflected in the appended tariff sheets to become effective March 1, 
2007. 
 
VIII. ADDITIONAL SUPPORTING INFORMATION 
 
Section 35.13 of the Commission’s regulations generally requires public utilities 
to file certain cost and other information related to an examination of traditional cost-of-
service rates.36  However, the changes included in the Schedule 2 Amendments are not 
traditional “rates” and the ISO is not a traditional investor-owned utility.  Therefore, to 
the extent necessary, the ISO requests waiver of Section 35.13 of the Commission’s 
regulations.  Notwithstanding its request for waiver, the ISO submits the following 
                                                 
33 To put in context, the costs of the fixed component (i.e., the CC costs) over the last 12 calendar months 
total $12,183,512.83.  The variable costs (i.e., the PC, LOC and SCL costs) over the last 12 calendar 
months total $23,255,938.71. 
 
34 The Reliability Region Cost Allocation Proposal was also presented to the Participants Committee at the 
October 13th meeting as a motion to amend the main motion on the substance of Schedule 2, but failed 
with approximately a 60% vote in favor (a two-thirds or better vote was required to pass the proposed 
amendment) and thus, is not included in the Schedule 2 Amendments filed herein.   
 
35 Although the current cost allocation method under Schedule 2 remains unchanged by the Schedule 2 
Amendments submitted herein, the ISO intends to address this issue further in its currently established cost 
allocation working group.  The ISO will initiate this effort following the conclusion of the ongoing review 
of the cost allocation for Local Second Contingency Protection Resources.  Once this review is completed, 
the ISO will discuss the issue with the working group to evaluate the current and potential alternative 
methods, the underlying policies and implementation requirements, for allocating Schedule 2 costs and to 
determine whether any changes should be proposed to the current just and reasonable method for allocating 
such costs within New England. 
 
36 18 C.F.R. § 35.13 (2005). 
Honorable Magalie R. Salas 
December 29, 2006 
Page 22 of 24 
 
 
DMEAST #9695005 v1 
additional information in substantial compliance with relevant provisions of Section 
35.13. 
 
35.13(b)(1) - Materials included herewith are as follows:  
• This transmittal letter; 
• Attachment 1: Redlined Tariff sheets reflecting the changes proposed by 
this filing;37 
• Attachment 2: Clean revised Tariff sheets reflecting the changes proposed 
by this filing; 
• Attachment 3:  A spreadsheet containing data from AEP methodology 
filings made by generators in PJM since 2000 used in the development of 
the updated CC Rate; 
• Attachment 4:  A spreadsheet containing the historical Schedule 2 VAR 
costs used to calculate the impact of increasing the CC Rate; and 
• Attachment 5:  List of governors and utility regulatory agencies in 
Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island and 
Vermont to which a copy of this filing has been sent. 
 
35.13(b)(2) - As set forth in Section VI above, the ISO and NEPOOL request that 
the proposed changes become effective March 1, 2007. 
 
35.13(b)(3) - Pursuant to Section 17.11(e) of the Participants Agreement, 
Governance Participants are being served electronically rather than by paper copy.  The 
names and addresses of the Governance Participants are posted on the ISO’s website at 
http://www.iso-ne.com/regulatory/ferc/nepool/gov_prtcpnts_eserved.pdf.  A paper copy 
of this transmittal letter and the accompanying materials have also been sent to the 
governors and electric utility regulatory agencies for the six New England states that 
comprise the New England Control Area, and to the New England Conference of Public 
Utility Commissioners, Inc.  The names and addresses of these governors and regulatory 
agencies are shown in Attachment 3.  In accordance with Commission rules and practice, 
there is no need for the Governance Participants or the entities identified on Attachment 3 
to be included on the Commission’s official service list in the captioned proceeding 
unless such entities become intervenors in this proceeding. 
                                                 
37 Because the changes to Schedule 2 are so extensive, in some places the substance of existing portions of 
the schedule have shifted to different tariff sheets from where they previously appeared.  To make it easier 
for the Commission to discern the substance of the changes, the redlines in Attachment 1 show the changes 
in substance rather than the changes to each individual tariff sheet.      
Honorable Magalie R. Salas 
December 29, 2006 
Page 23 of 24 
 
 
DMEAST #9695005 v1 
35.13(b)(4) - A description of the materials submitted pursuant to this filing is 
contained in Section IV of this transmittal letter.  
35.13(b)(5) - The reasons for this filing are discussed in Sections I and IV of this 
transmittal letter. 
35.13(b)(6) - The ISO’s approval of these changes is evidenced by this filing.  
These changes reflect the results of the Participant Processes required by the Participants 
Agreement and reflect the support of Participants Committee. 
35.13(b)(7) – Neither the ISO nor NEPOOL has knowledge of any relevant 
expenses or costs of service that have been alleged or judged in any administrative or 
judicial proceeding to be illegal, duplicative, or unnecessary costs that are demonstrably 
the product of discriminatory employment practices. 
 
  
Attachment 1 
 
ISO New England Inc. 
1st RevOriginal Sheet No. 735 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 735 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007With notice, on or after February 1, 2005 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 292, 20064 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
SCHEDULE 2 
 
REACTIVE SUPPLY AND VOLTAGE CONTROL FROM 
GENERATION SOURCESQUALIFIED REACTIVE RESOURCES SERVICE 
In order to maintain transmission voltages on the New England Transmission System (for 
voltage constraints that are reflected in the ISO’s systems for operating the New England 
Transmission System or in the ISO’s operating procedures New England Operating Procedures) 
within acceptable limits, generation facilitiesQualified Reactive Resources (as defined below) 
are operated to produce (or absorb) reactive power.  Thus, Reactive Supply and Voltage Control 
from Generation Sources ServiceThus, VAR Service (as defined below) must be provided for 
each transactionto support Regional Network Service and Through or Out Service on the New 
England Transmission System (forboth of which services have a direct impact on voltage 
constraints that are reflected in the ISO’s systems for operating the New England Transmission 
System or in the ISO’s operating procedures New England Operating Procedures).  The amount 
of Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation SourcesVAR Service that must be 
supplied with respect to a Transmission Customer’s transactionRegional Network Service and 
Through or Out Service will be determined based on the degree of dynamic reactive power 
support necessary to maintain transmission voltages within limits that are generally accepted in 
the region and consistently adhered to byin the operation of the New England Transmission 
OwnersSystem.  Additional information regarding the processes used to collect data and 
calculate amounts due or payable under this Schedule 2 can be found in the Ancillary Service 
Schedule 2 Business Procedure posted on the ISO website.  Local level service may be provided 
ISO New England Inc. 
1st RevOriginal Sheet No. 735 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 735 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007With notice, on or after February 1, 2005 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 292, 20064 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
by the PTOs under Schedule 21 ofTransmission Customers taking Local Service, MTF Service 
or OTF Service may also need to acquire voltage support services not otherwise provided under 
this Schedule 2 pursuant to Schedules 18, 20A, 20B or 21 to this OATT, as appropriate.
ISO New England Inc. 
1st RevOriginal Sheet No. 736 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 736 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007With notice, on or after February 1, 2005 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 292, 20064 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
I. 
DETERMINING THE AMOUNT TO BE PAID FOR SERVICE UNDER THIS 
SCHEDULE 
Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service is to be provided through 
the ISO and the Transmission Customer must purchase through the ISO service for voltage 
support capability provided by Qualified Generators and service when the ISO (or applicable 
Local Control Center dispatching center) determines, in the exercise of its discretion, that it is 
necessary to direct a generating unit to alter its operations in an hour in order to provide such 
service.  The charge for such service shall be paid by each Transmission Customer which 
receives either Regional Network Service or Through or Out Service and shall be determined in 
accordance with the following formula: 
CH 
=    (CC + LOC + SCL + PC) 
RC
HL
RC
HL
+
+
1
1
 
in which 
CH 
= 
the amount to be paid by the Transmission Customer for 
the hour; 
I. 
DEFINITIONS 
ISO New England Inc. 
1st RevOriginal Sheet No. 736 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 736 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007With notice, on or after February 1, 2005 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 292, 20064 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
Qualified Generator Reactive Resource(s):  means any generator source of dynamic 
reactive power that meets the criteria specified in Section II of this Schedule 2. 
Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resource(s):  means any non-generator source of 
dynamic reactive power that meets the criteria specified in Section II of this Schedule 2. 
Qualified Reactive Resource(s):  means any Qualified Generator Reactive Resource 
and/or Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resource. 
VAR Service:  means the provision of reactive power voltage support to the New 
England Transmission System by a Qualified Reactive Resource or by other generators that are 
dispatched by the ISO to provide dynamic reactive power. 
VAR Payment:  means the payment made to Qualified Reactive Resources for VAR 
Service capability under Section V.A. of this Schedule 2. 
VAR CC Rate:  means the CC Rate paid to Qualified Reactive Resources for VAR 
Service capability under Section V.A. of this Schedule 2. 
 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 736A 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
II. 
ELIGIBILITY FOR PAYMENT UNDER SCHEDULE 2 
A. 
Qualified Generator Reactive Resources 
Qualified Generator Reactive Resources shall be eligible for VAR Payments under this 
Schedule 2.  In addition, any generator that is dispatched by ISO-NE for the purpose of providing 
voltage support to the New England Transmission System shall be eligible to recover its Lost 
Opportunity Costs (“LOC”), Cost of Energy Consumed (“CEC”), and Cost of Energy Produced 
(“CEP”) pursuant to Sections V.B-D of this Schedule 2. 
A generator shall be deemed a Qualified Generator Reactive Resource if it meets the following 
criteria: 
1. 
the entity owning or controlling the reactive power capability of the 
generator reactive resource is a Market Participant;  
2. 
the generator is: (a) interconnected to the New England Transmission 
System or (b) interconnected to the distribution system but participating in the 
New England Markets and (c) is metered and dispatchable by the ISO or 
otherwise subject to operational control by the ISO; 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 736B 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
3. 
the generator provides measurable reactive power voltage support to the 
New England Transmission System, as determined from time-to-time by the 
ISO, and has its automatic voltage regulator status and control mode (including 
power factor, reactive power output and voltage control) telemetered to the ISO 
and the applicable Local Control Center; provided that the generator shall have 
until January 1, 2009 to have the necessary telemetering equipment installed and 
operating;  
4. 
the generator meets the reactive power testing requirements applicable 
to generators, as determined from time-to-time by the ISO and specified in the 
ISO New England Operating Documents; and  
5. 
the installation of the generator shall have been approved in accordance 
with the requirements of Section I.3.9 of the Tariff or its predecessor or successor 
provisions under the New England regional transmission arrangements. 
Any generator that has been receiving VAR Payments under Schedule 2 prior to June 1, 2007 
shall be deemed to be a Qualified Generator Reactive Resource as of that date, provided that 
it continues to meet the criteria specified in Section II, A. (1), (3) and (4), above; provided 
that, commencing June 1, 2007, generators that are Qualified Generator 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 736C 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
Reactive Resources as of June 1, 2007 but that do not submit an updated NX-12 form with 
leading VAR data prior to June 1, 2007 will not receive VAR Payments until the beginning 
of the year following the submittal of their updated NX-12 leading VAR data.  
Additionally, following June 1, 2007 each generator seeking to be newly designated as a 
Qualified Generator Reactive Resource shall submit information to the ISO regarding its 
capability to provide leading VAR Service prior to receiving any leading VAR Payments 
under Schedule 2.  Such information shall be submitted in the form and within the 
timeframe prescribed in the Ancillary Service Schedule 2 Business Procedure and/or the 
Schedule 2 VAR Payment Implementation Rule. 
B. 
Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resources 
Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resources shall be eligible for VAR Payments under this 
Schedule 2 commencing on January 1, 2008, except for the Cross Sound Cable, which shall be 
eligible for VAR Payments commencing March 1, 2007, provided that Cross Sound Cable has 
satisfied all of the eligibility criteria specified below in this Section B.  However, to the extent 
that cost recovery for the dynamic reactive power capability of a non-generator resource could 
occur under the PTF cost recovery mechanism, it shall occur only under such cost recovery 
mechanism and not under this Schedule 2.
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 736D 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
A non-generator shall be deemed a Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resource if it meets the 
following criteria: 
1. 
the entity owning or controlling the reactive power capability of the non-
generator reactive power resource is a Market Participant; 
2. 
the non-generator reactive power equipment provides measurable dynamic 
reactive power voltage support to the New England Transmission System, as 
determined from time-to-time by the ISO; 
3. 
the type of dynamic reactive power equipment is within a category of 
equipment that has been approved by the ISO, with advisory input from the 
Reliability Committee; 
4. 
the dynamic reactive power equipment is subject to the operating authority 
of the ISO and all necessary operating protocols for provision of reactive power 
voltage support from such equipment have been agreed to, in writing, between the 
ISO and the non-generator reactive power resource; 
5. 
such equipment is interconnected to the New England Transmission 
System and metered and dispatchable by the ISO or otherwise subject to 
operational control by the ISO, and has its automatic voltage regulator status and 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 736E 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
control mode (including power factor, reactive power output and voltage control) 
telemetered to the ISO and the applicable Local Control Center; provided that the 
non-generator shall have until January 1, 2009 to have the necessary 
telemetering equipment installed and operating; 
6. 
the non-generator reactive resource meets the reactive power testing 
requirements applicable to such non-generators, as determined from time-to-time 
by the ISO and specified in the ISO New England Operating Documents; and 
7. 
the installation of such equipment shall have been approved in accordance 
with the requirements of Section I.3.9 of the Tariff or its predecessor provisions 
under the New England regional transmission arrangements. 
C. 
Non-Dynamic Reactive Resources 
Nothing in this Schedule 2 is intended to preclude, or provide support for, the cost recovery 
under a separate schedule to the Tariff, filed with the Commission pursuant to the 
requirements of Sections 205 or 206 of the Federal Power Act, for non-generator, non-
dynamic reactive resources that are interconnected to and provide VAR Service to the New 
England Transmission System but do not meet the criteria to be deemed either Qualified 
Non-Generator Reactive Resources or PTF. 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 736F 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
III. 
DETERMINING THE AMOUNT TO BE PAID FOR SERVICE UNDER THIS 
SCHEDULE 
Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service is toVAR Service under 
this Schedule 2 shall be provided through the ISO. and the  Transmission Customers must 
purchase VAR Service through the ISO service for voltage support capability provided by 
Qualified Generators and service when the ISO (or applicable Local Control Center dispatching 
center) determines, in the exercise of its discretion, that it is necessary to direct a generating unit 
to alter its operations in an hour in order to provide such service.  The charge for such service 
shall be paid by each Transmission Customer which receives either Regional Network Service or 
Through or Out Service andfor the support of transmission voltages on the New England 
Transmission System.  The charge for VAR Service shall be determined in accordance with the 
following formula: 
CH 
=    (CC + LOC + SCL + PCCEC + CEP) 
RC
HL
RC
HL
+
+
1
1
 
in which: 
CH 
= 
the amount to be paid by the Transmission Customer for 
the hour;
ISO New England Inc. 
1st RevOriginal Sheet No. 737 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 737 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007With notice, on or after February 1, 2005 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 292, 20064 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
CC 
= 
the capacity costs for the hour shall be the VAR Revenue 
Requirement determined as set forth herein divided by the 
number of hours in the month; 
LOC = 
the lost opportunity costs for the hour to be paid to Market 
Participants who provide VAR supportfor a dynamic 
reactive power resource that provides VAR Service to meet 
reliability criteria within one or more Reliability Regions; 
CEPPC 
= 
the cost of energy produced which is the portion of 
the amount paid to Market Participants for the hour for 
Energy produced by a generating unit that is considered 
under this Schedule 2 to be paid for VAR supportdynamic 
reactive power resource for VAR Service to meet reliability 
criteria within one or more Reliability Regions; 
CECSCL 
= 
the cost of energy consumed which is the cost of 
energy used in the hour by generating facilities, 
synchronous condensers or static controlled VAR 
regulatorsa dynamic reactive power resource in order to 
ISO New England Inc. 
1st RevOriginal Sheet No. 737 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 737 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007With notice, on or after February 1, 2005 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 292, 20064 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
provide VAR support to the transmission systemService to 
meet reliability crieria within one or more Reliability 
Regions; 
HL1 
= 
the Regional Network Load of the Transmission Customer 
for the hour; 
ISO New England Inc. 
1st RevOriginal Sheet No. 738 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 738 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007With notice, on or after February 1, 2005 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 292, 20064 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
HL 
= 
the aggregate of the Regional Network Loads of all 
Transmission Customer for the hour; 
RC1 
= 
the Reserved Capacity for Through or Out Service of the 
Transmission Customers for the hour; and 
RC 
= 
the aggregate Reserved Capacity for Through or Out 
Service of all Transmission Customers for the hour. 
IV. 
ALLOCATION OF VAR SERVICE COSTS 
The charge for VAR Service shall be paid by each Transmission Customer that receives either 
Regional Network Service or Through or Out Service. 
VII. 
DETERMINING A GENERATOR’S COMPENSATION FOR PROVIDING 
SERVICEQUALIFIED REACTIVE RESOURCE’S PAYMENT UNDER THIS 
SCHEDULE 
The compensation to be paid to generatorsresources providing Schedule 2VAR sService shall be 
based on the four componentsas set forth below. 
1A. 
Capacity Cost (CC) 
1.1. 
A Qualified GeneratorReactive Resource shall be eligible to 
receive compensation for the capability to deliver VARs to the system (a 
“VAR Payments”) under the Capacity Cost component of this Schedule 2 
ISO New England Inc. 
1st RevOriginal Sheet No. 738 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 738 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007With notice, on or after February 1, 2005 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 292, 20064 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
measurable voltage support, as determined from time to time by the ISO to 
the New England Control Areafor the capability to provide VAR 
Service.as provided herein.  A “Qualified Generator” is any generator that 
is in the Market System and provides 
ISO New England Inc. 
1st RevOriginal Sheet No. 739 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 739 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007With notice, on or after February 1, 2005 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 292, 20064 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
1.2. 
The VAR Payment for VAR Service associated with lagging capability is 
not intended to compensate a Qualified Generator for losses associated 
with station use and energizing the generator leads andReactive Resource 
for reactive power absorbed by the generator step-up transformer.  
Payment for VAR Service associated with leading capability is intended to 
compensate a Qualified Generator Reactive Resource for reactive power 
absorbed by the generator step-up transformer. 
1.3. 
The “VAR CC Rate” will be established each year as of January 1 on a 
prospective basis for that calendar year and shall be the Base 
VARAdjusted CC Rate * Min (1, (1.2*Forecast Peak Adjusted Reference 
Load for the year/(SUM of all (Qualified Generator’sReactive Resources’ 
Summer Seasonal Claimed Capability))). 
1.4. 
The “Base VAR Rate” shall be $0.90/kVAR-yr in 2001; $0.95/kVAR-yr 
in 2002; $1.00/kVAR-yr in 2003 and $1.05/kVAR-yr in 2004 and 
thereafter.The “Base CC Rate” shall be $1.05/kVAR-yr before June 1, 
2007 and shall be $2.32/kVAR-yr commencing June 1, 2007 and shall not 
be changed pursuant to Section 205 of the Federal Power Act until January 
1, 2012.  An examination of the Base CC Rate shall be completed no later 
than July 1, 2011; such examination shall determine whether the Base CC 
ISO New England Inc. 
1st RevOriginal Sheet No. 739 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 739 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007With notice, on or after February 1, 2005 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 292, 20064 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
Rate is still appropriate or whether it should be changed commencing 
January 1, 2012.
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 739A 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
5. 
Commencing January 1, 2008, the Adjusted CC Rate shall be a single 
rate applied over the full range of leading and lagging capability of a 
Qualified Reactive Resource and shall be determined as described 
below.  Until then, the Adjusted CC Rate shall be applicable only for 
lagging capability and shall equal the Base CC Rate.  Commencing 
January 1, 2008, on an annual basis, the Base CC Rate shall be 
converted into an Adjusted CC Rate, expressed in the form of $/kVAR-
yr, representing the amount to be paid for leading and lagging 
capability.  From that time forward, the Adjusted CC Rate shall be 
calculated in accordance with the following formula:  Adjusted CC 
Rate (CCRateadjusted) shall equal: (the Base CC Rate (CCRatebase) * 
Current Total Aggregate lagging VARs) / (Current Total Aggregate 
Lagging VARs + Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs).  The basis 
of each such formula element and methodology for calculation is set 
forth in the Schedule 2 VAR Payment Implementation Rule.  The 
details of the Schedule 2 VAR Payment Implementation Rule may be 
modified by the ISO without a filing under the Federal Power Act, 
provided that: (i) the modifications are consistent with the requirements 
of this Schedule 2; and (ii) the modifications receive the support of at 
least two-thirds of the voting percentage of the Transmission 
Committee members.
ISO New England Inc. 
1st Rev Original Sheet No. 740 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 740 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007With notice, on or after February 1, 2005 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 292, 20064 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
1.56. The “Forecast Peak Adjustment Reference Load” shall be the value 
published in the then-most recently published Forecast Report of Capacity, 
Energy, Loads and Transmission (the “CELT rReport”) at the time the 
VAR CC Rate is established for a year. 
7. 
“Seasonal Claimed Capability” for Qualified Reactive Resources shall 
be determined as follows: 
a.1.6. A “Qualified Generator Reactive Resource’s Seasonal Claimed 
Capability” shall be the Seasonal Claimed Capability of each 
Qualified Generator applicable for the season in which the ISO 
Forecast Peak Adjusted Load is forecast to occur.  The Seasonal 
Claimed Capability (SCC) represents the Summer (SCC-S) and 
Winter (SCC-W) Claimed Capability of a generating unit (or 
ISO approved combination of units in accordance with ISO New 
England Operating Procedures).  Claimed Capability Ratings are 
the maximum dependable load carrying ability, in megawatts to 
three decimal places, of such unit or units, excluding capacity 
required for station use.  SCC-S and SCC-W are the MW values 
of the Resource that will be used as billing determinants under 
this Tariff. 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 740A 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
b. 
A “Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resource’s Seasonal 
Claimed Capability” shall be 2.5 times the maximum dynamic 
reactive power capability on a lagging basis demonstrated by the 
Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resource during the testing 
of its VAR Service capability consistent with ISO Procedures 
for measurement of such capability. 
1.7. 
The “VAR Revenue Requirement” shall be the sum over a month of all 
Qualified Reactive Resources’ VAR PaymentsSUM (Qualified 
Generator’s VAR Payment). 
1.8. 
A Qualified GeneratorReactive Resource’s VAR Payment shall equal the 
(1/12) * (VAR CC Rate*Qualified VARs). 
1.8.1. The VAR Rate is determined pursuant to paragraph 1.3 above. 
1.8.29. Qualified GeneratorsReactive Resources will be paid their VAR Rate 
under this Section for each month of a calendar year starting with the 
month in which this Section becomes effectivethe resource is approved as 
a Qualified Reactive Resource. 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 740A 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
1.9. 
“Qualified VARs” shall be: 
1.9.1. Qualified VARs of an untested unit shall be equal to the 
Lagging VAR capability at Seasonal Claimed Capability for the 
season of forecasted peak as indicated on the Qualified Generator’s 
NX-12D form that is then in effect adjusted for losses to station 
service and energizing the generator leads and generator step-up 
transformer. 
10. 
“Qualified VARs” shall be determined as follows: 
(a)1.9.2. 
As soon as practicable, but in no event longer than two 
years from the effective date of this Section,In accordance with the 
ISO New England Operating Procedures, the Qualified VARs of a 
Qualified GeneratorReactive Resource initially 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 740B 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
shall be determined at its point of delivery to the system,through an 
actual testing in accordance with the then-applicable Operating 
ProceduresVAR testing procedures set forth in the ISO New 
England Operating Procedures.  At least every five (5) years after 
that initial test, an ongoing test of the VAR capability of a 
Qualified Generator across its full operating range shall be 
conductedReactive Resource to supply VAR Service in both 
leading and lagging capability shall be conducted.  Prior to January 
1, 2008, the Qualified VARs of a Qualified Reactive Resource 
shall equal the lagging VAR capability of the resource as 
determined pursuant to this section.  On and after January 1, 2008, 
the Qualified VARs of a Qualified Reactive Resource shall equal 
the sum total of the absolute values of the leading and lagging 
VAR capability of the resource determined pursuant to this section. 
(b) 
Prior to January 1, 2008: 
• the Qualified VARs of an untested Qualified Generator 
Reactive Resource shall be equal to the lagging VAR 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 740B 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
capability at the Summer Seasonal Claimed Capability as 
indicated on the Qualified Generator Reactive Resource's 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 740C 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
NX-12D form that is then in effect adjusted (downward for 
lagging capability) for reactive power absorbed by the 
generator step-up transformer.  
• The Qualified VARs of an untested Qualified Non Generator 
Reactive Resource shall be equal to the lagging VAR 
capability at the corresponding Summer Seasonal Claimed 
Capability or an equivalent point as indicated on the 
Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resource's NX-12D form 
that is then in effect adjusted for reactive power absorbed by 
its step-up transformer.  
(c) 
On and after January 1, 2008: 
• the Qualified VARs of an untested Qualified Generator 
Reactive Resource shall be equal to the sum of the absolute 
values of the lagging VAR capability at the Summer 
Seasonal Claimed Capability and the leading VAR capability 
at the EcoMin point as indicated on the Qualified Generator 
Reactive Resource's NX-12D form that is then in effect 
ISO New England Inc. 
1st RevOriginal Sheet No. 741 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 741 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007With notice, on or after February 1, 2005 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 292, 20064 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
adjusted (downward for lagging capability and upward for 
leading capability) for reactive power absorbed by the 
generator step-up transformer. 
• The Qualified VARs of an untested Qualified Non-Generator 
Reactive Resource shall be equal to the sum of the absolute 
values of the lagging VAR capability at the corresponding 
Summer Seasonal Claimed Capability or an equivalent point 
and the leading VAR capability at the corresponding EcoMin 
point or an equivalent point as indicated on the Qualified 
Non-Generator Reactive Resource's NX-12D form that is 
then in effect adjusted for reactive power absorbed by its 
step-up transformer.  
2B. 
Lost Opportunity Cost (LOC) 
2.1. 
The Lost Opportunity Cost for hydro, pumped storage and thermal 
generating units The LOC for generators that are dispatched down by, or 
at the request of, the ISO, or a PTO’s Local Control Center, or PTO 
dispatch center for the purpose of providing reactive supply and voltage 
controlVAR Service will be calculated pursuant to Market Rule 1. 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 741A 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
2. 
Commencing January 1, 2008, Qualified Non-Generator Reactive 
Resources shall be eligible for payment of the LOC for Qualified Non-
Generator Reactive Resources that are dispatched down (pursuant to 
the authority established within written operating protocols developed 
under Section II.B.4) at the request of the ISO or a Local Control 
Center for the purpose of providing VAR Service.  The LOC of such 
Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resources will be calculated 
pursuant to procedures established at the time of approval of the 
equipment type pursuant to Section II.B and filed with the Commission 
pursuant to the requirements of Section 205 of the Federal Power Act. 
 
ISO New England Inc. 
1st RevOriginal Sheet No. 742 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 742 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007With notice, on or after February 1, 2005 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 292, 20064 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
C3. 
Cost of Energy Consumed (CECSCL) 
3.1. 
Motoring Hydro or Pumped Storage Generating Units.  The CECSCL 
associated with hydro and pumped storage generating units that are 
motoring at the request of the ISO, or a PTO’s Local Control Center, or 
PTO dispatch center for the purpose of providing reactive supply and 
voltage controlVAR Service will equal the cost of energy to motor and 
will be calculated in each hour as follows: CECSCL = (MWhUnit * (ECP 
or LMP or Aactual energy cost), where the MWh Unit are calculated 
pursuant to the Ancillary Service Schedule 2 Business Procedure.  The 
Aactual energy cost applies only if motoring energy is purchased through 
a bilateral contract. 
3.2. 
Synchronous Condensers and Static Controlled VAR Regulators 
(SC/SCV).  The SCLFor the Chester SCV, the CEC will be set to zero 
($0), and the cost of energy to supply reactive supply and voltage control 
from the Chester SCV will be treated as losses on the New England 
Transmission System.  This treatment will be revisited by the ISO on an 
as-needed basis (e.g., upon the addition of a new SC or SCV within the 
New England Control Area). 
3. 
Commencing January 1, 2008, Qualified Non-Generator Reactive 
Resources shall be eligible for payment of the CEC incurred by 
ISO New England Inc. 
1st RevOriginal Sheet No. 742 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 742 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007With notice, on or after February 1, 2005 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 292, 20064 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resources for the purpose of 
providing VAR Service (pursuant to the authority established within 
written operating protocols developed under Section II.B.4).  The CEC 
of such Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resources shall be measured 
pursuant to procedures established at the time of approval of the 
equipment type pursuant to Section II.B and filed with the Commission 
pursuant to the requirements of Section 205 of the Federal Power Act. 
ISO New England Inc. 
1st RevOriginal Sheet No. 743 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 743 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007With notice, on or after February 1, 2005 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 292, 20064 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
4. 
Cost of Energy Produced (CEPPC) 
4.1. 
Thermal Generating Units.  The CEPPC associated with thermal 
generating units that are brought on-line by the ISO, or a PTO’s Local 
Control Center, or PTO dispatch center for the purpose of providing 
reactive supply and voltage controlVAR Service shall equal the portion of 
the total uplift to be paid that resource for a day that is attributed to the 
hour(s) during which the resource is run to provide this serviceVAR 
Service in accordance with Market Rule 1 and the ISO System RulesNew 
England Operating Documents. 
4.2. 
Hydro and Pumped Storage Generating Units.  The PCThe CEP associated 
with hydro or pumped storage generating units that are producing real 
power and that have also been brought on-line by the ISO, or a PTO’s 
Local Control Center, or PTO dispatch center to provide reactive supply 
and voltage control VAR Service shall equal the portion of the total uplift 
to be paid that resource for a day that is attributed to the hour(s) during 
which the resource is run to provide this serviceVAR Service in 
accordance with Market Rule 1 and the ISO System RulesNew England 
Operating Documents. 
3. 
Commencing January 1, 2008, Qualified Non-Generator Reactive 
Resources shall be eligible for payment of the CEP incurred by 
ISO New England Inc. 
1st RevOriginal Sheet No. 743 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 743 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007With notice, on or after February 1, 2005 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 292, 20064 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resources for the purpose of 
providing VAR Service (pursuant to the authority established within 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 743A 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
written operating protocols developed under Section II.B.4).  The 
CEP of such Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resources shall be 
measured pursuant to procedures established at the time of approval 
of the equipment type pursuant to Section II.B and filed with the 
Commission pursuant to the requirements of Section 205 of the 
Federal Power Act. 
VI. 
ALTERNATIVE PAYMENT FOR VAR SERVICE 
Where a non-generator source of VAR Service (i) responds to identified needs for 
dynamic reactive power on the New England Transmission System, as identified in the Regional 
System Plan, and (ii) is confirmed by the ISO as a dynamic reactive power resource that will 
meet the identified need, and (iii) such non-generator source of VAR Service meets the criteria to 
be a Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resource but cannot recover its costs of providing 
dynamic reactive power under Schedule 2, such non-generator may submit a separate schedule to 
the ISO OATT to be filed with the Commission pursuant to the requirements of Section 205 of 
the Federal Power Act for a rate to be paid to allow such resource to recover its costs related to 
providing VAR Service.  In such case, it shall not be considered a Qualified Non-Generator 
Reactive Resource under this Schedule 2 and its provision of VAR Service and payment shall be 
governed solely by such separate schedule filed with the Commission.
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 743B 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 VAR Payment Implementation Rule 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
SCHEDULE 2 VAR PAYMENT IMPLEMENTATION RULE  
This rule describes the steps to be taken to calculate the VAR CC Rate on or after 
January 1, 2008 in accordance with Section V.A. of Schedule 2.  Applicable to that time forward 
on an annual basis, the Base CC Rate shall be converted into a VAR CC Rate, expressed in the 
form of $/kVAR-yr, representing the amount to be paid for leading and lagging capability. 
The following calculations shall be done in December of each year to calculate the VAR 
CC Rate for the next year of VAR Payments for leading and lagging reactive power capability in 
the following year. As described below, the VAR CC Rate shall be updated on an annual basis 
utilizing the most current leading and lagging test results, and it is expected to take three years to 
test all of the Qualified Reactive Resources in leading mode. 
1. 
Calculate the “Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs”, which shall equal the 
“Current Net Aggregate Tested Lagging VARs” plus the “Current Net Aggregate 
Non-Tested Lagging VARs”; 
Where: 
a. 
the Current Net Aggregate Tested Lagging VARs shall equal the total of 
Net Lagging kVARs for all Schedule 2 Qualified Reactive Resources that 
have completed a successful lagging VAR test, as reflected in the most 
current monthly VAR Status Report that is posted on the ISO website 
(http://www.iso-
ne.com/stlmnts/iso_rto_tariff/schd2/var_status/index.html); this value will 
reflect the lagging kVARs of Schedule 2 Qualified Reactive Resources as 
taken from its lagging VAR test results adjusted for losses incurred for 
such VARs to reach the high side of the step-up transformer (i.e., gross 
lagging VARs test results adjusted down for losses); and
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 743C 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 VAR Payment Implementation Rule 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
b. 
the Current Net Aggregate Non-Tested lagging VARs shall equal the total 
of net lagging kVARs for all Schedule 2 Qualified Reactive Resources 
that have not yet completed a successful lagging VAR test, as reflected in 
the most current monthly VAR Status Report that is posted on the ISO 
website (http://www.iso-
ne.com/stlmnts/iso_rto_tariff/schd2/var_status/index.html); this value will 
reflect the lagging kVARs of Schedule 2 Qualified Reactive Resources as 
taken from its NX-12D (and NX-9B, where needed to calculate generator 
step-up transformer losses) data at EcoMin adjusted for losses incurred for 
such VARs to reach the high side of the step-up transformer (i.e., gross 
lagging VARs NX-12D data at SCC adjusted down for losses). 
c. 
Increase and decrease limiters shall be applied to potential increases or 
decreases in the Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs as follows: 
i. 
Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs Limiters for Year 1 
(2008) and Year 3 (2010): 
• The Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs value shall not be 
limited for Year 1 and Year 3. 
ii. 
Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs Limiters for Year 2 
(2009): 
• Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs Increase Limiter for Year 
2: the calculated Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs will be 
limited to no greater than 110% of the Current Total Aggregate 
Lagging VARs value used in the determination of CCRateadjusted 
for the prior year (Year 1); and 
• Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs Decrease Limiter for Year 
2: the calculated Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs will be 
limited to no less than 90% of the Current Total Aggregate 
Lagging VARs value used in the determination of CCRateadjusted 
for the prior year (Year 1). 
iii. 
Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs Limiters for Year 4 
(2011) and beyond: 
• Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs Increase Limiter for Year 
4 and beyond: the calculated Current Total Aggregate Lagging 
VARs will be limited to no greater than 130% of the Current Total 
Aggregate Lagging VARs value used in the determination of 
CCRateadjusted for Year 3; and 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 743D 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 VAR Payment Implementation Rule 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
• Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs Decrease Limiter for Year 
4 and beyond: the calculated Current Total Aggregate Lagging 
VARs will be limited to no less than 70% of the Current Total 
Aggregate Lagging VARs value used in the determination of 
CCRateadjusted for Year 3. 
2. 
Calculate the Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs which shall equal the 
Current Net Aggregate Tested Leading VARs plus the Current Net Aggregate 
Non-Tested Leading VARs; 
Where: 
a. 
the Current Net Aggregate Tested Leading VARs shall equal the total of 
Net Leading kVARs for all Schedule 2 Qualified Reactive Resources that 
have completed a successful Leading VAR Test, as reflected in the most 
current monthly VAR Status Report that is posted on the ISO website 
(http://www.iso-
ne.com/stlmnts/iso_rto_tariff/schd2/var_status/index.html); this value will 
reflect the Leading kVARs of Schedule 2 Qualified Reactive Resources as 
taken from its leading VAR test results adjusted for losses incurred for 
such VARs to reach the high side of the step-up transformer (i.e., gross 
leading VARs test results adjusted up for losses); 
b. 
the Current Net Aggregate Non-Tested Leading VARs: shall equal the 
total of Net Leading kVARs for all Schedule 2 Qualified Reactive 
Resources that have not yet completed a successful Leading VAR Test, as 
reflected in the most current monthly VAR Status Report that is posted on 
the ISO website (http://www.iso-
ne.com/stlmnts/iso_rto_tariff/schd2/var_status/index.html). This value will 
reflect the Leading kVARs of Schedule 2 Qualified Reactive Resources as 
taken from its NX-12D (and NX-9B, where needed to calculate generator 
step-up transformer losses) data at EcoMin adjusted for losses incurred for 
such VARs to reach the high side of the step-up transformer (i.e., gross 
leading VARs NX-12D data at EcoMin adjusted up for losses). 
c. 
Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs Limiters 
i. 
Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs Limiters for Year 1 and 
Year 4: 
• The Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs value shall not be 
limited for Year 1 (2008) and Year 3 (2010) . 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 743E 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 VAR Payment Implementation Rule 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
ii. 
Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs Limiters for Year 2 
(2009) : 
• Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs Increase Limiter for Year 
2: the calculated Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs will be 
limited to no greater than 110% of the Current Total Aggregate 
Leading VARs value used in the determination of CCRateadjusted for 
the prior year (Year 1); and 
• Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs Decrease Limiter for Year 
2: the calculated Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs will be 
limited to no less than 90% of the Current Total Aggregate 
Leading VARs value used in the determination of CCRateadjusted for 
the prior year (Year 1). 
iii. 
Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs Limiters for Year 4 and 
beyond: 
• Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs Increase Limiter for Year 
4 (2011) and beyond: the calculated Current Total Aggregate 
Leading VARs will be limited to no greater than 130% of the 
Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs value used in the 
determination of CCRateadjusted for Year 3; and 
• Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs Decrease Limiter for Year 
4 and beyond: the calculated Current Total Aggregate Leading 
VARs will be limited to no less than 70% of the Current Total 
Aggregate Leading VARs value used in the determination of 
CCRateadjusted for Year 3. 
3. 
Calculate the Adjusted CC Rate (CCRateadjusted): shall equal (the Base CC Ratee * 
Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs) / (Current Total Aggregate Lagging 
VARs + Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs) where the Base CC Rate shall 
equal $2.32/kVAR-yr unless changed as provided for under Schedule 2. 
4. 
VAR CC Rate (“VARCCRate”): shall equal (the Adjusted CC Rate) * (the lesser 
of 1 or (1.2 * “Forecast Peak Adjusted Reference Load” for the year / the sum of 
the “Qualified Reactive Resources’ Seasonal Claimed Capability”)); 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 743F 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 VAR Payment Implementation Rule 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
Where: 
a. 
the “Forecast Peak Adjusted Reference Load” for the year shall equal the 
amount specified as “Adjusted Reference Load” for the applicable year in 
Section I.1 - Summaries – Summer from the most current Forecast Report 
of Capability, Energy, Loads and Transmission (CELT Report) 
(http://www.iso-ne.com/trans/celt/report/index.html); 
b. 
The sum of the “Qualified Reactive Resources’ Seasonal Claimed 
Capability” shall equal the Qualified Generator Reactive Resources’ 
Seasonal Claimed Capability plus the Qualified Non-Generator Reactive 
Resources’ Adjusted Seasonal Claimed Capability; 
Where: 
i. 
the Qualified Generator Reactive Resources’ Seasonal Claimed 
Capability: shall equal the total of the “Summer Seasonal Claimed 
Capability” column of all Qualified Generator VAR Resources 
from the most current VAR Status Report (http://www.iso-
ne.com/stlmnts/iso_rto_tariff/schd2/var_status/index.html); and 
ii. 
the Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resources’ Adjusted 
Seasonal Claimed Capability shall equal 2.50 times the total of the 
“Summer Seasonal Claimed Capability” column of all Qualified 
non-Generator VAR Resources from the most current VAR Status 
Report (http://www.iso-
ne.com/stlmnts/iso_rto_tariff/schd2/var_status/index.html). 
5. 
Monthly VAR Payment for a Qualified Reactive Resource in a particular month 
shall equal the (VARCCRate / 12 * (its Monthly Net Lagging VARs for that 
month + its Monthly Net Leading VARs for that month)), as reflected in the 
applicable monthly VAR Status Report that is posted on the ISO website 
(http://www.iso-ne.com/stlmnts/iso_rto_tariff/schd2/var_status/index.html).  
a. 
Monthly Net Lagging VARs:  Qualified Reactive Resource’s Monthly Net 
Lagging VARs value shall equal its VAR value based on (a) its most 
recent successful Lagging VAR test or (b) if it has not yet completed such 
a test, its VAR value at SCC based on its submitted and ISO accepted NX-
12D and NX-9B data.  The Qualified VAR Resource’s Monthly Net 
Lagging VARs value shall be reflected in the applicable monthly VAR 
Status Report that is posted on the ISO website (http://www.iso-
ne.com/stlmnts/iso_rto_tariff/schd2/var_status/index.html). 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 743G 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 VAR Payment Implementation Rule 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
b. 
Monthly Net Leading VARs:  a Qualified Reactive Resource’s Monthly 
Net Leading VARs value shall equal its VAR value based on (a) its most 
recent successful Leading VAR test or (b) if it has not yet completed such 
a test, its VAR value at EcoMin based on its submitted and ISO accepted 
NX-12D and NX-9B data.  The Qualified Reactive Resource’s Monthly 
Net Leading VARs value shall be reflected in the applicable monthly VAR 
Status Report that is posted on the ISO website (http://www.iso-
ne.com/stlmnts/iso_rto_tariff/schd2/var_status/index.html).
  
Attachment 2 
 
ISO New England Inc. 
1st Rev Sheet No. 735 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 735 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
SCHEDULE 2 
 
REACTIVE SUPPLY AND VOLTAGE CONTROL FROM 
QUALIFIED REACTIVE RESOURCES SERVICE 
In order to maintain transmission voltages on the New England Transmission System (for 
voltage constraints that are reflected in the ISO’s systems for operating the New England 
Transmission System or in the ISO New England Operating Procedures) within acceptable 
limits, Qualified Reactive Resources (as defined below) are operated to produce (or absorb) 
reactive power.  Thus, VAR Service (as defined below) must be provided to support Regional 
Network Service and Through or Out Service on the New England Transmission System (both of 
which services have a direct impact on voltage constraints that are reflected in the ISO’s systems 
for operating the New England Transmission System or in the ISO New England Operating 
Procedures).  The amount of VAR Service that must be supplied with respect to a Transmission 
Customer’s Regional Network Service and Through or Out Service will be determined based on 
the degree of dynamic reactive power support necessary to maintain transmission voltages within 
limits that are consistently adhered to in the operation of the New England Transmission System.  
Additional information regarding the processes used to collect data and calculate amounts due or 
payable under this Schedule 2 can be found in the Ancillary Service Schedule 2 Business 
Procedure posted on the ISO website.  Transmission Customers taking Local Service, MTF 
Service or OTF Service may also need to acquire voltage support services not otherwise 
provided under this Schedule 2 pursuant to Schedules 18, 20A, 20B or 21 to this OATT, as 
appropriate.
ISO New England Inc. 
1st Rev Sheet No. 736 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 736 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
I. 
DEFINITIONS 
Qualified Generator Reactive Resource(s):  means any generator source of dynamic 
reactive power that meets the criteria specified in Section II of this Schedule 2. 
Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resource(s):  means any non-generator source of 
dynamic reactive power that meets the criteria specified in Section II of this Schedule 2. 
Qualified Reactive Resource(s):  means any Qualified Generator Reactive Resource 
and/or Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resource. 
VAR Service:  means the provision of reactive power voltage support to the New 
England Transmission System by a Qualified Reactive Resource or by other generators that are 
dispatched by the ISO to provide dynamic reactive power. 
VAR Payment:  means the payment made to Qualified Reactive Resources for VAR 
Service capability under Section V.A. of this Schedule 2. 
VAR CC Rate:  means the CC Rate paid to Qualified Reactive Resources for VAR 
Service capability under Section V.A. of this Schedule 2. 
 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 736A 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
II. 
ELIGIBILITY FOR PAYMENT UNDER SCHEDULE 2 
A. 
Qualified Generator Reactive Resources 
Qualified Generator Reactive Resources shall be eligible for VAR Payments under this 
Schedule 2.  In addition, any generator that is dispatched by ISO-NE for the purpose of providing 
voltage support to the New England Transmission System shall be eligible to recover its Lost 
Opportunity Costs (“LOC”), Cost of Energy Consumed (“CEC”), and Cost of Energy Produced 
(“CEP”) pursuant to Sections V.B-D of this Schedule 2. 
A generator shall be deemed a Qualified Generator Reactive Resource if it meets the following 
criteria: 
1. 
the entity owning or controlling the reactive power capability of the 
generator reactive resource is a Market Participant;  
2. 
the generator is: (a) interconnected to the New England Transmission 
System or (b) interconnected to the distribution system but participating in the 
New England Markets and (c) is metered and dispatchable by the ISO or 
otherwise subject to operational control by the ISO; 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 736B 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
3. 
the generator provides measurable reactive power voltage support to the 
New England Transmission System, as determined from time-to-time by the 
ISO, and has its automatic voltage regulator status and control mode (including 
power factor, reactive power output and voltage control) telemetered to the ISO 
and the applicable Local Control Center; provided that the generator shall have 
until January 1, 2009 to have the necessary telemetering equipment installed and 
operating;  
4. 
the generator meets the reactive power testing requirements applicable 
to generators, as determined from time-to-time by the ISO and specified in the 
ISO New England Operating Documents; and  
5. 
the installation of the generator shall have been approved in accordance 
with the requirements of Section I.3.9 of the Tariff or its predecessor or successor 
provisions under the New England regional transmission arrangements. 
Any generator that has been receiving VAR Payments under Schedule 2 prior to June 1, 2007 
shall be deemed to be a Qualified Generator Reactive Resource as of that date, provided that 
it continues to meet the criteria specified in Section II, A. (1), (3) and (4), above; provided 
that, commencing June 1, 2007, generators that are Qualified Generator 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 736C 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
Reactive Resources as of June 1, 2007 but that do not submit an updated NX-12 form with 
leading VAR data prior to June 1, 2007 will not receive VAR Payments until the beginning 
of the year following the submittal of their updated NX-12 leading VAR data.  
Additionally, following June 1, 2007 each generator seeking to be newly designated as a 
Qualified Generator Reactive Resource shall submit information to the ISO regarding its 
capability to provide leading VAR Service prior to receiving any leading VAR Payments 
under Schedule 2.  Such information shall be submitted in the form and within the 
timeframe prescribed in the Ancillary Service Schedule 2 Business Procedure and/or the 
Schedule 2 VAR Payment Implementation Rule. 
B. 
Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resources 
Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resources shall be eligible for VAR Payments under this 
Schedule 2 commencing on January 1, 2008, except for the Cross Sound Cable, which shall be 
eligible for VAR Payments commencing March 1, 2007, provided that Cross Sound Cable has 
satisfied all of the eligibility criteria specified below in this Section B.  However, to the extent 
that cost recovery for the dynamic reactive power capability of a non-generator resource could 
occur under the PTF cost recovery mechanism, it shall occur only under such cost recovery 
mechanism and not under this Schedule 2.
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 736D 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
A non-generator shall be deemed a Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resource if it meets the 
following criteria: 
1. 
the entity owning or controlling the reactive power capability of the non-
generator reactive power resource is a Market Participant; 
2. 
the non-generator reactive power equipment provides measurable dynamic 
reactive power voltage support to the New England Transmission System, as 
determined from time-to-time by the ISO; 
3. 
the type of dynamic reactive power equipment is within a category of 
equipment that has been approved by the ISO, with advisory input from the 
Reliability Committee; 
4. 
the dynamic reactive power equipment is subject to the operating authority 
of the ISO and all necessary operating protocols for provision of reactive power 
voltage support from such equipment have been agreed to, in writing, between the 
ISO and the non-generator reactive power resource; 
5. 
such equipment is interconnected to the New England Transmission 
System and metered and dispatchable by the ISO or otherwise subject to 
operational control by the ISO, and has its automatic voltage regulator status and 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 736E 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
control mode (including power factor, reactive power output and voltage control) 
telemetered to the ISO and the applicable Local Control Center; provided that the 
non-generator shall have until January 1, 2009 to have the necessary 
telemetering equipment installed and operating; 
6. 
the non-generator reactive resource meets the reactive power testing 
requirements applicable to such non-generators, as determined from time-to-time 
by the ISO and specified in the ISO New England Operating Documents; and 
7. 
the installation of such equipment shall have been approved in accordance 
with the requirements of Section I.3.9 of the Tariff or its predecessor provisions 
under the New England regional transmission arrangements. 
C. 
Non-Dynamic Reactive Resources 
Nothing in this Schedule 2 is intended to preclude, or provide support for, the cost recovery 
under a separate schedule to the Tariff, filed with the Commission pursuant to the 
requirements of Sections 205 or 206 of the Federal Power Act, for non-generator, non-
dynamic reactive resources that are interconnected to and provide VAR Service to the New 
England Transmission System but do not meet the criteria to be deemed either Qualified 
Non-Generator Reactive Resources or PTF. 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 736F 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
III. 
DETERMINING THE AMOUNT TO BE PAID FOR SERVICE UNDER THIS 
SCHEDULE 
VAR Service under this Schedule 2 shall be provided through the ISO.  Transmission Customers 
must purchase VAR Service through the ISO for the support of transmission voltages on the 
New England Transmission System.  The charge for VAR Service shall be determined in 
accordance with the following formula: 
CH 
=    (CC + LOC + CEC + CEP) 
RC
HL
RC
HL
+
+
1
1
 
in which: 
CH 
= 
the amount to be paid by the Transmission Customer for 
the hour;
ISO New England Inc. 
1st Rev Sheet No. 737 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 737 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
CC 
= 
the capacity costs for the hour shall be the VAR Revenue 
Requirement determined as set forth herein divided by the 
number of hours in the month; 
LOC = 
the lost opportunity costs for the hour to be paid for a 
dynamic reactive power resource that provides VAR 
Service to meet reliability criteria within one or more 
Reliability Regions; 
CEP 
= 
the cost of energy produced which is the portion of the 
amount paid for the hour for Energy produced by a 
dynamic reactive power resource for VAR Service to meet 
reliability criteria within one or more Reliability Regions; 
CEC 
= 
the cost of energy consumed which is the cost of energy 
used in the hour by a dynamic reactive power resource in 
order to provide VAR Service to meet reliability crieria 
within one or more Reliability Regions; 
HL1 
= 
the Regional Network Load of the Transmission Customer 
for the hour; 
ISO New England Inc. 
1st Rev Sheet No. 738 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 738 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
HL 
= 
the aggregate of the Regional Network Loads of all 
Transmission Customer for the hour; 
RC1 
= 
the Reserved Capacity for Through or Out Service of the 
Transmission Customers for the hour; and 
RC 
= 
the aggregate Reserved Capacity for Through or Out 
Service of all Transmission Customers for the hour. 
IV. 
ALLOCATION OF VAR SERVICE COSTS 
The charge for VAR Service shall be paid by each Transmission Customer that receives either 
Regional Network Service or Through or Out Service. 
V. 
DETERMINING A QUALIFIED REACTIVE RESOURCE’S PAYMENT UNDER 
THIS SCHEDULE 
The compensation to be paid to resources providing VAR Service shall be as set forth below. 
A. 
Capacity Cost (CC) 
1. 
A Qualified Reactive Resource shall be eligible to receive VAR 
Payments under the Capacity Cost component of this Schedule 2 for the 
capability to provide VAR Service.
ISO New England Inc. 
1st Rev Sheet No. 739 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 739 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
2. 
Payment for VAR Service associated with lagging capability is not 
intended to compensate a Qualified Generator Reactive Resource for 
reactive power absorbed by the generator step-up transformer.  Payment 
for VAR Service associated with leading capability is intended to 
compensate a Qualified Generator Reactive Resource for reactive power 
absorbed by the generator step-up transformer. 
3. 
The “VAR CC Rate” will be established each year as of January 1 on a 
prospective basis for that calendar year and shall be the Adjusted CC Rate 
* Min (1, (1.2*Forecast Peak Adjusted Reference Load for the year/(SUM 
of all Qualified Reactive Resources’ Summer Seasonal Claimed 
Capability))). 
4. 
The “Base CC Rate” shall be $1.05/kVAR-yr before June 1, 2007 and 
shall be $2.32/kVAR-yr commencing June 1, 2007 and shall not be 
changed pursuant to Section 205 of the Federal Power Act until January 1, 
2012.  An examination of the Base CC Rate shall be completed no later 
than July 1, 2011; such examination shall determine whether the Base CC 
Rate is still appropriate or whether it should be changed commencing 
January 1, 2012.
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 739A 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
5. 
Commencing January 1, 2008, the Adjusted CC Rate shall be a single 
rate applied over the full range of leading and lagging capability of a 
Qualified Reactive Resource and shall be determined as described 
below.  Until then, the Adjusted CC Rate shall be applicable only for 
lagging capability and shall equal the Base CC Rate.  Commencing 
January 1, 2008, on an annual basis, the Base CC Rate shall be 
converted into an Adjusted CC Rate, expressed in the form of $/kVAR-
yr, representing the amount to be paid for leading and lagging 
capability.  From that time forward, the Adjusted CC Rate shall be 
calculated in accordance with the following formula:  Adjusted CC 
Rate (CCRateadjusted) shall equal: (the Base CC Rate (CCRatebase) * 
Current Total Aggregate lagging VARs) / (Current Total Aggregate 
Lagging VARs + Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs).  The basis 
of each such formula element and methodology for calculation is set 
forth in the Schedule 2 VAR Payment Implementation Rule.  The 
details of the Schedule 2 VAR Payment Implementation Rule may be 
modified by the ISO without a filing under the Federal Power Act, 
provided that: (i) the modifications are consistent with the requirements 
of this Schedule 2; and (ii) the modifications receive the support of at 
least two-thirds of the voting percentage of the Transmission 
Committee members.
ISO New England Inc. 
1st Rev Sheet No. 740 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 740 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
6. 
The “Forecast Peak Adjustment Reference Load” shall be the value 
published in the then-most recently published Forecast Report of Capacity, 
Energy, Loads and Transmission (the “CELT Report”) at the time the 
VAR CC Rate is established for a year. 
7. 
“Seasonal Claimed Capability” for Qualified Reactive Resources shall 
be determined as follows: 
a. 
A “Qualified Generator Reactive Resource’s Seasonal Claimed 
Capability” shall be the Seasonal Claimed Capability of each 
Qualified Generator applicable for the season in which the ISO 
Forecast Peak Adjusted Load is forecast to occur.  The Seasonal 
Claimed Capability (SCC) represents the Summer (SCC-S) and 
Winter (SCC-W) Claimed Capability of a generating unit (or 
ISO approved combination of units in accordance with ISO New 
England Operating Procedures).  Claimed Capability Ratings are 
the maximum dependable load carrying ability, in megawatts to 
three decimal places, of such unit or units, excluding capacity 
required for station use.  SCC-S and SCC-W are the MW values 
of the Resource that will be used as billing determinants under 
this Tariff. 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 740A 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
b. 
A “Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resource’s Seasonal 
Claimed Capability” shall be 2.5 times the maximum dynamic 
reactive power capability on a lagging basis demonstrated by the 
Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resource during the testing 
of its VAR Service capability consistent with ISO Procedures 
for measurement of such capability. 
7. 
The “VAR Revenue Requirement” shall be the sum over a month of all 
Qualified Reactive Resources’ VAR Payments. 
8. 
A Qualified Reactive Resource’s VAR Payment shall equal (1/12) * (VAR 
CC Rate*Qualified VARs). 
9. 
Qualified Reactive Resources will be paid their VAR Rate under this 
Section for each month of a calendar year starting with the month in which 
the resource is approved as a Qualified Reactive Resource. 
10. 
“Qualified VARs” shall be determined as follows: 
(a) 
In accordance with the ISO New England Operating Procedures, 
the Qualified VARs of a Qualified Reactive Resource initially 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 740B 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
shall be determined through an actual testing in accordance with 
the then-applicable VAR testing procedures set forth in the ISO 
New England Operating Procedures.  At least every five (5) years 
after that initial test, an ongoing test of the capability of a Qualified 
Reactive Resource to supply VAR Service in both leading and 
lagging capability shall be conducted.  Prior to January 1, 2008, the 
Qualified VARs of a Qualified Reactive Resource shall equal the 
lagging VAR capability of the resource as determined pursuant to 
this section.  On and after January 1, 2008, the Qualified VARs of 
a Qualified Reactive Resource shall equal the sum total of the 
absolute values of the leading and lagging VAR capability of the 
resource determined pursuant to this section. 
(b) 
Prior to January 1, 2008: 
• the Qualified VARs of an untested Qualified Generator 
Reactive Resource shall be equal to the lagging VAR 
capability at the Summer Seasonal Claimed Capability as 
indicated on the Qualified Generator Reactive Resource's 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 740C 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
NX-12D form that is then in effect adjusted (downward for 
lagging capability) for reactive power absorbed by the 
generator step-up transformer.  
• The Qualified VARs of an untested Qualified Non Generator 
Reactive Resource shall be equal to the lagging VAR 
capability at the corresponding Summer Seasonal Claimed 
Capability or an equivalent point as indicated on the 
Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resource's NX-12D form 
that is then in effect adjusted for reactive power absorbed by 
its step-up transformer.  
(c) 
On and after January 1, 2008: 
• the Qualified VARs of an untested Qualified Generator 
Reactive Resource shall be equal to the sum of the absolute 
values of the lagging VAR capability at the Summer 
Seasonal Claimed Capability and the leading VAR capability 
at the EcoMin point as indicated on the Qualified Generator 
Reactive Resource's NX-12D form that is then in effect 
ISO New England Inc. 
1st Rev Sheet No. 741 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 741 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
adjusted (downward for lagging capability and upward for 
leading capability) for reactive power absorbed by the 
generator step-up transformer. 
• The Qualified VARs of an untested Qualified Non-Generator 
Reactive Resource shall be equal to the sum of the absolute 
values of the lagging VAR capability at the corresponding 
Summer Seasonal Claimed Capability or an equivalent point 
and the leading VAR capability at the corresponding EcoMin 
point or an equivalent point as indicated on the Qualified 
Non-Generator Reactive Resource's NX-12D form that is 
then in effect adjusted for reactive power absorbed by its 
step-up transformer.  
B. 
Lost Opportunity Cost (LOC) 
1. 
The LOC for generators that are dispatched down by, or at the request of, 
the ISO, or a Local Control Center for the purpose of providing VAR 
Service will be calculated pursuant to Market Rule 1. 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 741A 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
2. 
Commencing January 1, 2008, Qualified Non-Generator Reactive 
Resources shall be eligible for payment of the LOC for Qualified Non-
Generator Reactive Resources that are dispatched down (pursuant to 
the authority established within written operating protocols developed 
under Section II.B.4) at the request of the ISO or a Local Control 
Center for the purpose of providing VAR Service.  The LOC of such 
Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resources will be calculated 
pursuant to procedures established at the time of approval of the 
equipment type pursuant to Section II.B and filed with the Commission 
pursuant to the requirements of Section 205 of the Federal Power Act. 
 
ISO New England Inc. 
1st Rev Sheet No. 742 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 742 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
C. 
Cost of Energy Consumed (CEC) 
1. 
The CEC associated with hydro and pumped storage generating units that 
are motoring at the request of the ISO or a Local Control Center for the 
purpose of providing VAR Service will equal the cost of energy to motor 
and will be calculated in each hour as follows: CEC = (MWhUnit * (LMP 
or actual energy cost), where the MWh Unit are calculated pursuant to the 
Ancillary Service Schedule 2 Business Procedure.  The actual energy cost 
applies only if motoring energy is purchased through a bilateral contract. 
2. 
For the Chester SCV, the CEC will be set to zero ($0), and the cost of 
energy to supply reactive supply and voltage control from the Chester 
SCV will be treated as losses on the New England Transmission System. 
3. 
Commencing January 1, 2008, Qualified Non-Generator Reactive 
Resources shall be eligible for payment of the CEC incurred by 
Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resources for the purpose of 
providing VAR Service (pursuant to the authority established within 
written operating protocols developed under Section II.B.4).  The CEC 
of such Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resources shall be measured 
pursuant to procedures established at the time of approval of the 
equipment type pursuant to Section II.B and filed with the Commission 
pursuant to the requirements of Section 205 of the Federal Power Act. 
ISO New England Inc. 
1st Rev Sheet No. 743 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
Superseding Original 743 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
4. 
Cost of Energy Produced (CEP) 
1. 
The CEP associated with thermal generating units that are brought on-line 
by the ISO or a Local Control Center for the purpose of providing VAR 
Service shall equal the portion of the total uplift to be paid that resource 
for a day that is attributed to the hour(s) during which the resource is run 
to provide VAR Service in accordance with Market Rule 1 and the ISO 
New England Operating Documents. 
2. 
The CEP associated with hydro or pumped storage generating units that 
are producing real power and that have also been brought on-line by the 
ISO or a Local Control Center to provide VAR Service shall equal the 
portion of the total uplift to be paid that resource for a day that is 
attributed to the hour(s) during which the resource is run to provide VAR 
Service in accordance with Market Rule 1 and the ISO New England 
Operating Documents. 
3. 
Commencing January 1, 2008, Qualified Non-Generator Reactive 
Resources shall be eligible for payment of the CEP incurred by 
Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resources for the purpose of 
providing VAR Service (pursuant to the authority established within 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 743A 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 - Reactive Supply and Voltage Control from Generation Sources Service 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
written operating protocols developed under Section II.B.4).  The 
CEP of such Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resources shall be 
measured pursuant to procedures established at the time of approval 
of the equipment type pursuant to Section II.B and filed with the 
Commission pursuant to the requirements of Section 205 of the 
Federal Power Act. 
VI. 
ALTERNATIVE PAYMENT FOR VAR SERVICE 
Where a non-generator source of VAR Service (i) responds to identified needs for 
dynamic reactive power on the New England Transmission System, as identified in the Regional 
System Plan, and (ii) is confirmed by the ISO as a dynamic reactive power resource that will 
meet the identified need, and (iii) such non-generator source of VAR Service meets the criteria to 
be a Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resource but cannot recover its costs of providing 
dynamic reactive power under Schedule 2, such non-generator may submit a separate schedule to 
the ISO OATT to be filed with the Commission pursuant to the requirements of Section 205 of 
the Federal Power Act for a rate to be paid to allow such resource to recover its costs related to 
providing VAR Service.  In such case, it shall not be considered a Qualified Non-Generator 
Reactive Resource under this Schedule 2 and its provision of VAR Service and payment shall be 
governed solely by such separate schedule filed with the Commission.
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 743B 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 VAR Payment Implementation Rule 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
SCHEDULE 2 VAR PAYMENT IMPLEMENTATION RULE  
This rule describes the steps to be taken to calculate the VAR CC Rate on or after 
January 1, 2008 in accordance with Section V.A. of Schedule 2.  Applicable to that time forward 
on an annual basis, the Base CC Rate shall be converted into a VAR CC Rate, expressed in the 
form of $/kVAR-yr, representing the amount to be paid for leading and lagging capability. 
The following calculations shall be done in December of each year to calculate the VAR 
CC Rate for the next year of VAR Payments for leading and lagging reactive power capability in 
the following year. As described below, the VAR CC Rate shall be updated on an annual basis 
utilizing the most current leading and lagging test results, and it is expected to take three years to 
test all of the Qualified Reactive Resources in leading mode. 
1. 
Calculate the “Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs”, which shall equal the 
“Current Net Aggregate Tested Lagging VARs” plus the “Current Net Aggregate 
Non-Tested Lagging VARs”; 
Where: 
a. 
the Current Net Aggregate Tested Lagging VARs shall equal the total of 
Net Lagging kVARs for all Schedule 2 Qualified Reactive Resources that 
have completed a successful lagging VAR test, as reflected in the most 
current monthly VAR Status Report that is posted on the ISO website 
(http://www.iso-
ne.com/stlmnts/iso_rto_tariff/schd2/var_status/index.html); this value will 
reflect the lagging kVARs of Schedule 2 Qualified Reactive Resources as 
taken from its lagging VAR test results adjusted for losses incurred for 
such VARs to reach the high side of the step-up transformer (i.e., gross 
lagging VARs test results adjusted down for losses); and
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 743C 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 VAR Payment Implementation Rule 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
b. 
the Current Net Aggregate Non-Tested lagging VARs shall equal the total 
of net lagging kVARs for all Schedule 2 Qualified Reactive Resources 
that have not yet completed a successful lagging VAR test, as reflected in 
the most current monthly VAR Status Report that is posted on the ISO 
website (http://www.iso-
ne.com/stlmnts/iso_rto_tariff/schd2/var_status/index.html); this value will 
reflect the lagging kVARs of Schedule 2 Qualified Reactive Resources as 
taken from its NX-12D (and NX-9B, where needed to calculate generator 
step-up transformer losses) data at EcoMin adjusted for losses incurred for 
such VARs to reach the high side of the step-up transformer (i.e., gross 
lagging VARs NX-12D data at SCC adjusted down for losses). 
c. 
Increase and decrease limiters shall be applied to potential increases or 
decreases in the Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs as follows: 
i. 
Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs Limiters for Year 1 
(2008) and Year 3 (2010): 
• The Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs value shall not be 
limited for Year 1 and Year 3. 
ii. 
Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs Limiters for Year 2 
(2009): 
• Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs Increase Limiter for Year 
2: the calculated Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs will be 
limited to no greater than 110% of the Current Total Aggregate 
Lagging VARs value used in the determination of CCRateadjusted 
for the prior year (Year 1); and 
• Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs Decrease Limiter for Year 
2: the calculated Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs will be 
limited to no less than 90% of the Current Total Aggregate 
Lagging VARs value used in the determination of CCRateadjusted 
for the prior year (Year 1). 
iii. 
Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs Limiters for Year 4 
(2011) and beyond: 
• Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs Increase Limiter for Year 
4 and beyond: the calculated Current Total Aggregate Lagging 
VARs will be limited to no greater than 130% of the Current Total 
Aggregate Lagging VARs value used in the determination of 
CCRateadjusted for Year 3; and 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 743D 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 VAR Payment Implementation Rule 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
• Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs Decrease Limiter for Year 
4 and beyond: the calculated Current Total Aggregate Lagging 
VARs will be limited to no less than 70% of the Current Total 
Aggregate Lagging VARs value used in the determination of 
CCRateadjusted for Year 3. 
2. 
Calculate the Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs which shall equal the 
Current Net Aggregate Tested Leading VARs plus the Current Net Aggregate 
Non-Tested Leading VARs; 
Where: 
a. 
the Current Net Aggregate Tested Leading VARs shall equal the total of 
Net Leading kVARs for all Schedule 2 Qualified Reactive Resources that 
have completed a successful Leading VAR Test, as reflected in the most 
current monthly VAR Status Report that is posted on the ISO website 
(http://www.iso-
ne.com/stlmnts/iso_rto_tariff/schd2/var_status/index.html); this value will 
reflect the Leading kVARs of Schedule 2 Qualified Reactive Resources as 
taken from its leading VAR test results adjusted for losses incurred for 
such VARs to reach the high side of the step-up transformer (i.e., gross 
leading VARs test results adjusted up for losses); 
b. 
the Current Net Aggregate Non-Tested Leading VARs: shall equal the 
total of Net Leading kVARs for all Schedule 2 Qualified Reactive 
Resources that have not yet completed a successful Leading VAR Test, as 
reflected in the most current monthly VAR Status Report that is posted on 
the ISO website (http://www.iso-
ne.com/stlmnts/iso_rto_tariff/schd2/var_status/index.html). This value will 
reflect the Leading kVARs of Schedule 2 Qualified Reactive Resources as 
taken from its NX-12D (and NX-9B, where needed to calculate generator 
step-up transformer losses) data at EcoMin adjusted for losses incurred for 
such VARs to reach the high side of the step-up transformer (i.e., gross 
leading VARs NX-12D data at EcoMin adjusted up for losses). 
c. 
Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs Limiters 
i. 
Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs Limiters for Year 1 and 
Year 4: 
• The Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs value shall not be 
limited for Year 1 (2008) and Year 3 (2010) . 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 743E 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 VAR Payment Implementation Rule 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
ii. 
Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs Limiters for Year 2 
(2009) : 
• Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs Increase Limiter for Year 
2: the calculated Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs will be 
limited to no greater than 110% of the Current Total Aggregate 
Leading VARs value used in the determination of CCRateadjusted for 
the prior year (Year 1); and 
• Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs Decrease Limiter for Year 
2: the calculated Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs will be 
limited to no less than 90% of the Current Total Aggregate 
Leading VARs value used in the determination of CCRateadjusted for 
the prior year (Year 1). 
iii. 
Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs Limiters for Year 4 and 
beyond: 
• Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs Increase Limiter for Year 
4 (2011) and beyond: the calculated Current Total Aggregate 
Leading VARs will be limited to no greater than 130% of the 
Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs value used in the 
determination of CCRateadjusted for Year 3; and 
• Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs Decrease Limiter for Year 
4 and beyond: the calculated Current Total Aggregate Leading 
VARs will be limited to no less than 70% of the Current Total 
Aggregate Leading VARs value used in the determination of 
CCRateadjusted for Year 3. 
3. 
Calculate the Adjusted CC Rate (CCRateadjusted): shall equal (the Base CC Ratee * 
Current Total Aggregate Lagging VARs) / (Current Total Aggregate Lagging 
VARs + Current Total Aggregate Leading VARs) where the Base CC Rate shall 
equal $2.32/kVAR-yr unless changed as provided for under Schedule 2. 
4. 
VAR CC Rate (“VARCCRate”): shall equal (the Adjusted CC Rate) * (the lesser 
of 1 or (1.2 * “Forecast Peak Adjusted Reference Load” for the year / the sum of 
the “Qualified Reactive Resources’ Seasonal Claimed Capability”)); 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 743F 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 VAR Payment Implementation Rule 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
Where: 
a. 
the “Forecast Peak Adjusted Reference Load” for the year shall equal the 
amount specified as “Adjusted Reference Load” for the applicable year in 
Section I.1 - Summaries – Summer from the most current Forecast Report 
of Capability, Energy, Loads and Transmission (CELT Report) 
(http://www.iso-ne.com/trans/celt/report/index.html); 
b. 
The sum of the “Qualified Reactive Resources’ Seasonal Claimed 
Capability” shall equal the Qualified Generator Reactive Resources’ 
Seasonal Claimed Capability plus the Qualified Non-Generator Reactive 
Resources’ Adjusted Seasonal Claimed Capability; 
Where: 
i. 
the Qualified Generator Reactive Resources’ Seasonal Claimed 
Capability: shall equal the total of the “Summer Seasonal Claimed 
Capability” column of all Qualified Generator VAR Resources 
from the most current VAR Status Report (http://www.iso-
ne.com/stlmnts/iso_rto_tariff/schd2/var_status/index.html); and 
ii. 
the Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resources’ Adjusted 
Seasonal Claimed Capability shall equal 2.50 times the total of the 
“Summer Seasonal Claimed Capability” column of all Qualified 
non-Generator VAR Resources from the most current VAR Status 
Report (http://www.iso-
ne.com/stlmnts/iso_rto_tariff/schd2/var_status/index.html). 
5. 
Monthly VAR Payment for a Qualified Reactive Resource in a particular month 
shall equal the (VARCCRate / 12 * (its Monthly Net Lagging VARs for that 
month + its Monthly Net Leading VARs for that month)), as reflected in the 
applicable monthly VAR Status Report that is posted on the ISO website 
(http://www.iso-ne.com/stlmnts/iso_rto_tariff/schd2/var_status/index.html).  
a. 
Monthly Net Lagging VARs:  Qualified Reactive Resource’s Monthly Net 
Lagging VARs value shall equal its VAR value based on (a) its most 
recent successful Lagging VAR test or (b) if it has not yet completed such 
a test, its VAR value at SCC based on its submitted and ISO accepted NX-
12D and NX-9B data.  The Qualified VAR Resource’s Monthly Net 
Lagging VARs value shall be reflected in the applicable monthly VAR 
Status Report that is posted on the ISO website (http://www.iso-
ne.com/stlmnts/iso_rto_tariff/schd2/var_status/index.html). 
ISO New England Inc. 
Original Sheet No. 743G 
FERC Electric Tariff No. 3 
 
Open Access Transmission Tariff 
Section II – Schedule 2 VAR Payment Implementation Rule 
 
 
 
 
 
Issued by: 
Kathleen A. Carrigan, 
Effective:  March 1, 2007 
 
Senior Vice President and General Counsel 
Issued on: 
December 29, 2006 
DMEAST #5143539 v18 
b. 
Monthly Net Leading VARs:  a Qualified Reactive Resource’s Monthly 
Net Leading VARs value shall equal its VAR value based on (a) its most 
recent successful Leading VAR test or (b) if it has not yet completed such 
a test, its VAR value at EcoMin based on its submitted and ISO accepted 
NX-12D and NX-9B data.  The Qualified Reactive Resource’s Monthly 
Net Leading VARs value shall be reflected in the applicable monthly VAR 
Status Report that is posted on the ISO website (http://www.iso-
ne.com/stlmnts/iso_rto_tariff/schd2/var_status/index.html).
  
Attachment 3 
 
Zone
Generator
 Annual Reactive 
Power Service 
Revenue 
Requirement 
 Monthly 
Reactive Power 
Service Revenue 
Requirement 
Ferc Docket
Fuel/Turbine
Claimed 
Real 
Power 
Capability 
(MW)
Net MVAR 
@ 0.9pf
Effective Net 
Voltage 
Support Rate 
($/MVAR-yr)
Online 
Year
 Fixed 
Capability 
Component 
 Heating 
Losses 
Component 
Fixed 
Capability 
Component 
in $/MVAR-
yr 
AE
Atlantic City Electric Company
3,712,750
$         
309,396
$           
Conectiv Energy Supply, Inc.
1,140,535
$         
95,045
$             
TXU Pedricktown Cogeneration Company
263,515
$            
21,960
$             
APS
Allegheny Energy Supply Company, LLC
11,704,576
$       
975,381
$           
Armstrong Energy Limited Partnership
1,435,113
$         
119,593
$           
ER03-229
Gas Peaker
600
291
4,939
$          
Pleasants Energy, LLC
722,906
$            
60,242
$             
ER03-451
Gas Peaker
300
145
4,975
$          
Duke Energy Fayette, LLC
2,312,572
$         
192,714
$           
ER03-794-002
Gas Peaker
620
300
7,701
$          
Monongahela Power Company
3,193,690
$         
266,141
$           
Allegheny Energy Supply Company, LLC
1,354,022
$         
112,835
$           
Monongahela Power Company
403,763
$            
33,647
$             
BGE
Constellation Power Source, Inc.
8,344,846
$         
695,404
$           
ISG Sparrows Point, Inc.
319,464
$            
26,622
$             
ER03-852
Gas Peaker
152
74
4,340
$          
DPL
Conectiv Energy Supply, Inc.
3,756,981
$         
313,082
$           
NRG Power Marketing, Inc.
1,957,059
$         
163,088
$           
Commonwealth Chesapeake Company
1,270,890
$         
105,908
$           
ER02-2520
Gas Peaker
342
166
7,673
$          
JCPL
Jersey Central Power & Light Company
3,009,853
$         
250,821
$           
Calpine Energy Services, LP (Parlin)
693,132
$            
57,761
$             
ER04-889
Gas CC
114
55
12,554
$        
1991
Ocean Peaking Power, L.L.C.
952,555
$            
79,380
$             
ER05-289
Gas Peaker
330
160
5,960
$          
FPL Energy Power Marketing, Inc. NJEA
515,329
$            
42,944
$             
ER05-845
Gas Cogen
300
145
3,547
$          
METED
Metropolitan Edison Company
2,038,623
$         
169,885
$           
Reliant Energy Hunterstown, LLC
2,027,683
$         
168,974
$           
ER03-1164-000 Gas CC
830
402
5,044
$          
2003
1,749,489
$  
278,193
$   
4,352
$       
Calpine Energy Services, (Ontelaunee)
1,176,052
$         
98,004
$             
ER03-624-000
Gas CC
573
278
4,238
$          
2002
1,105,962
$  
70,089
$     
3,985
$       
PENELEC
Pennsylvania Electric Company
2,061,826
$         
171,819
$           
First Energy Solutions Corp.
47,432
$              
3,953
$               
Allegheny Electric Cooperative Inc.
21,416
$              
1,785
$               
Handsome Lake Energy, LLC
370,304
$            
30,859
$             
ER03-269-000
Gas Peaker
250
121
3,058
$          
Reliant Energy Seward, LLC
1,142,356
$         
95,196
$             
ER04-1164
Coal
521
252
4,527
$          
PECO
Exelon Generation Company, LLC
8,695,200
$         
724,600
$           
FPL Energy Power Marketing, Inc.
393,182
$            
32,765
$             
Liberty Electric Power, LLC
2,222,473
$         
185,206
$           
ER03-1209-000 Gas CC
521
252
8,808
$          
2002
2,042,120
$  
180,352
$   
8,093
$       
Fairless Energy, LLC
3,146,914
$         
262,243
$           
ER04-797
Gas CC
1,268
614
5,124
$          
2004
1,250,696
$  
104,216
$   
2,037
$       
FPL Energy Power Marketing, Inc.
1,500,000
$         
125,000
$           
ER05-316-000
Gas CC
750
363
4,129
$          
2005
CED Rock Springs, LLC
766,570
$            
63,881
$             
ER05-288
Gas Peaker
355
172
4,459
$          
Old Dominion Electric Cooperative
654,639
$            
54,553
$             
ER05-682
Gas Peaker
317
154
4,264
$          
PPL
PPL EnergyPlus, LLC
9,040,000
$         
753,333
$           
Allegheny Electric Cooperative, Inc.
898,115
$            
74,843
$             
Sunbury Generation, L.L.C.
450,000
$            
37,500
$             
ER02-2362
Coal
389
188
2,389
$          
WPS Westwood Generation, LLC
103,950
$            
8,663
$               
ER02-2361
Coal
30
15
7,154
$          
Safe Harbor Water Power Corporation
2,149,747
$         
179,146
$           
ER03-423
Hydro
400
194
11,097
$        
Conectiv Bethlehem, LLC
2,699,389
$         
224,949
$           
ER04-231-002
Gas CC
885
429
6,298
$          
2003
1,783,970
$  
310,282
$   
4,162
$       
Lower Mount Bethel Energy, LLC
1,086,303
$         
90,525
$             
ER04-1142
Gas CC
600
291
3,738
$          
2004
849,298
$     
237,005
$   
2,923
$       
PEPCO
Mirant Potomac River, LLC
4,733,477
$         
394,456
$           
Potomac Power Resources, Inc.
721,723
$            
60,144
$             
PSEG
PSEG Energy Resources & Trade, LLC
8,587,290
$         
715,608
$           
Calpine Energy Services, LP (Newark)
478,818
$            
39,901
$             
ER04-978
Gas CC
56
27
17,654
$        
1991
Newmarket Power Company, LLC
1,778,283
$         
148,190
$           
ER05-1058
Gas Peaker
149
72
8,784
$          
(Bayonne, Camden & Newark)
ER05-1059
Gas Peaker
146
71
8,784
$          
ER05-1060
Gas Peaker
123
60
8,784
$          
ComEd
Exelon Generation
10,227,259
$       
852,272
$           
Midwest Generation, LLC
2,295,784
$         
191,315
$           
ER04-190
Coal
9,287
4,290
535
$             
University Park Energy, LLC
543,304
$            
45,275
$             
ER04-765
Gas Peaker
300
145
3,739
$          
Duke Energy Lee, LLC
1,500,000
$         
125,000
$           
ER04-641
Gas Peaker
640
310
4,839
$          
PPL University Park, LLC
1,504,414
$         
125,368
$           
ER04-911
Gas Peaker
540
262
5,752
$          
Reliant Energy Aurora, LP
1,490,000
$         
124,167
$           
ER04-1066
Gas Peaker
873
423
3,524
$          
AEP
AEP East Operating Cos.
26,091,131
$       
2,174,261
$        
Big Sandy Peaker Plant, LLC
525,904
$            
43,825
$             
ER04-1103
Gas Peaker
300
145
3,620
$          
Wolf Hills Energy, LLC
442,023
$            
36,835
$             
ER04-1102
Gas Peaker
250
121
3,651
$          
Rolling Hills Generating, L.L.C.
1,100,000
$         
91,667
$             
ER04-1098
Gas Peaker
800
387
2,839
$          
Riverside Generating Company, L.L.C.
1,702,765
$         
141,897
$           
ER05-328
Gas Peaker
820
397
4,288
$          
Buckeye Power, Inc.
1,215,129
$         
101,261
$           
EL05-20
Coal
1,066
516
2,354
$          
Duke Energy Hanging Rock, LLC
3,429,356
$         
285,780
$           
ER05-567
Gas CC
1,240
601
5,710
$          
2003
3,328,957
$  
100,398
$   
5,543
$       
Duke Energy Washington LLC
1,569,806
$         
130,817
$           
ER05-623
Gas CC
620
300
5,228
$          
2002
1,519,992
$  
49,813
$     
5,062
$       
Indiana Municipal Power Agency
489,001
$            
40,750
$             
ER05-971
Gas Peaker
251
122
4,023
$          
Twelvepole Creek LLC
1,457,832
$         
121,486
$           
ER04-1166
Gas Peaker
458
222
6,572
$          
Dayton
The Dayton Power and Light Company
6,692,774
$         
557,731
$           
Dominion
Virginia Electric and Power Company
22,222,702
$       
1,851,892
$        
Tenaska Virginia Partners, L.P.
1,385,697
$         
115,475
$           
ER04-680
Gas CC
885
429
3,233
$          
2004
1,179,258
$  
206,439
$   
2,751
$       
FPL Energy Power Marketing, (Doswell)
1,341,384
$         
111,782
$           
ER05-1119
Gas CC
600
291
4,616
$          
2000
1,269,111
$  
72,272
$     
4,367
$       
FPL Energy Power Marketing, (Doswell)
268,440
$            
22,370
$             
ER05-1119
Gas CT
170
82
3,260
$          
2000
PJM
TOTAL
197,800,726
$     
16,483,394
$      
MISO Filings
IP/MIOS
Dynegy Mid West Generation Inc
7,584,800
$         
632,067
$           
ER05-270
Coal
4,042
1,958
3,874
$          
ATSI/MISO
Calpine Fox Energy Center
1,352,081
$         
112,673
$           
ER05-1361-000 Gas CC
600
291
4,653
$          
2005
1,352,081
$  
-
$           
4,653
$       
FE/MISO
Troy Energy, LLC
1,498,920
$         
124,910
$           
ER03-1396-000 Gas Peaker
620
300
4,992
$          
ATSI/MISO
Calpine Riverside Energy Center
1,205,900
$         
100,492
$           
ER04-1055
Gas CC
603
292
4,129
$          
2004
1,074,616
$  
131,284
$   
3,680
$       
ATSI/MISO
Calpine Rockgen
622,400
$            
51,867
$             
ER04-1059
Gas Peaker
475
230
2,705
$          
MISO
Duke Vermillion
1,100,000
$         
91,667
$             
ER05-123
Gas Peaker
640
310
3,549
$          
AMRN/MISO
Holland Energy
1,065,200
$         
88,767
$             
ER04-1075
Gas CC
650
315
3,384
$          
2002
1,029,527
$  
35,673
$     
3,270
$       
FE/MISO
Orion Power Midwest
2,056,255
$         
171,355
$           
ER04-717
Coal
1,310
634
3,241
$          
IN/MISO
IMPA Georgetown
166,176
$            
13,848
$             
EL05-134
Gas Peaker
170
82
2,018
$          
CMS/MISO
MI Power Livingston & Kalamazoo
415,000
$            
34,583
$             
ER05-341
Gas Peaker
200
97
4,284
$          
KY/MISO
Renaissance Power
881,000
$            
73,417
$             
ER04-992
Gas Peaker
680
329
2,675
$          
COMBINED CYCLE AVERAGES
4,966
$          
4,221
$       
 
  
Attachment 4 
 
Schedule 2 Costs from 05/05 through 10/06
- Corrected after Settlements review
(18 months)
Variable
Fixed
May-05
15,903,321.65
           
1,034,788.43
          
Jun-05
6,040,456.72
             
1,048,417.05
          
Jul-05
2,925,783.61
             
1,044,618.74
          
Aug-05
1,159,770.96
             
1,029,508.10
          
Sep-05               3,600,306.98 
1,016,535.31
          
(12 months)
Oct-05
1,931,910.18
             
1,016,535.31
          
Variable
Fixed
Nov-05
3,000,807.17
             
1,016,535.31
          
Nov-05
3,000,807.17
          
1,016,535.31
          
Dec-05
1,076,721.74
             
1,016,535.31
          
Dec-05
1,076,721.74
          
1,016,535.31
          
Jan-06
2,712,756.80
             
1,016,535.31
          
Jan-06
2,712,756.80
          
1,016,535.31
          
Feb-06
1,814,888.20
             
1,016,535.31
          
Feb-06
1,814,888.20
          
1,016,535.31
          
Mar-06
1,363,754.76
             
1,024,426.83
          
Mar-06
1,363,754.76
          
1,024,426.83
          
Apr-06
2,365,682.30
             
1,024,426.83
          
Apr-06
2,365,682.30
          
1,024,426.83
          
May-06
1,165,467.37
             
1,024,426.83
          
May-06
1,165,467.37
          
1,024,426.83
          
Jun-06
1,307,725.62
             
1,024,426.83
          
Jun-06
1,307,725.62
          
1,024,426.83
          
Jul-06
3,202,213.31
             
1,022,112.37
          
Jul-06
3,202,213.31
          
1,022,112.37
          
Aug-06
3,418,803.33
             
1,022,112.37
          
Aug-06
3,418,803.33
          
1,022,112.37
          
Sep-06
1,144,950.40
             
1,022,112.37
          
Sep-06
1,144,950.40
          
1,022,112.37
          
Oct-06
682,167.71
                
953,327.15
             
Oct-06
682,167.71
             
953,327.15
             
18 mo Total
54,817,488.81
    
18,373,915.76
  
12 mo Total
23,255,938.71
12,183,512.82
  
Mo Avg
3,045,416.05
      
1,020,773.10
    
Mo Avg
1,937,994.89
  
1,015,292.74
    
 Denotes numbers used in 
Schedule 2 Filing 
2nd half of 2007 calc
Fixed
CSC
Fixed=X*2.32
2,260,558.97
          
1
       CSC=75*2.32
14,500
   
    /1.05+CSC
2,260,558.97
          
2
    
       *1000/12
14,500
   
2,260,558.97
          
3
    
14,500
   
2,260,558.97
          
4
    
14,500
   
2,277,995.47
          
5
    
14,500
   
2,277,995.47
          
6
    
14,500
   
2,277,995.47
          
7
    
14,500
   
2,277,995.47
          
8
    
14,500
   
2,272,881.62
          
9
    
14,500
   
2,272,881.62
          
10
  
14,500
   
2,272,881.62
          
11
  
14,500
   
estimated
2,274,500.00
          
12
  
14,500
 
12 mo Total
27,247,362.62
  
12 mo Total
174,000
Mo Avg
2,270,613.55
    
 
  
Attachment 5 
 
  
New England Governors 
and Utility Regulatory 
and Related Agencies      
 
 
December 28, 2006 
 
Connecticut 
 
The Honorable M. Jodi Rell  
 
Connecticut Department of Public Utility Control 
State Capitol  
 
 
 
10 Franklin Square 
210 Capitol Ave. 
 
 
 
New Britain, CT  06051-2605 
Hartford, CT  06106  
 
 
 
 
Maine 
 
The Honorable John E. Baldacci  
 
Maine Public Utilities Commission 
One State House Station 
 
 
State House, Station 18 
Rm. 236 
 
 
 
 
242 State Street 
Augusta, ME  04333-0001 
 
 
Augusta, ME  04333-0018 
 
Massachusetts 
 
The Honorable Mitt Romney  
 
Massachusetts Department of Telecommunications 
Office of the Governor 
 
 
and Energy 
Rm. 360 State House  
 
 
One South Station 
Boston, MA  02133 
 
 
 
Boston, MA 02110 
 
New Hampshire 
 
The Honorable John H. Lynch    
 
New Hampshire Public Utilities Commission 
State House 
 
 
 
 
21 South Fruit Street 
25 Capitol Street 
 
 
 
Suite 10 
Concord, NH  03301  
 
 
Concord, NH  03301-2429 
 
Rhode Island 
 
The Honorable Donald L. Carcieri 
 
Rhode Island Public Utilities Commission 
State House Room 115 
 
 
89 Jefferson Boulevard 
Providence, RI  02903 
 
 
Warwick, RI  02888 
 
Vermont 
 
The Honorable James H. Douglas 
 
Vermont Public Service Board 
109 State Street, Pavilion 
 
 
112 State Street, Drawer 20 
Montpelier, VT  05609 
 
 
Montpelier, VT  05620-2701 
  
 
 
 
New England Governors 
and Utility Regulatory 
and Related Agencies      
 
 
December 28, 2006 
 
Anne C. George, President 
New England Conference of 
  Public Utilities Commissioners, Inc. 
c/o Connecticut Department of Public 
  Utility Control 
10 Franklin Square  
New Britain, CT  06051-2605 
 
William M. Nugent 
Executive Director 
New England Conference of  
  Public Utilities Commissioners, Inc. 
500 U.S. Route 1, Suite 21C 
Yarmouth, ME  04096  
 
Harvey L. Reiter, Esq. 
Counsel for New England Conference  
   of Public Utilities Commissioners, Inc. 
c/o Stinson Morrison Hecker LLP 
1150 18th Street, NW, Suite 800 
Washington, DC  20036-3816 
 
Power Planning Committee 
New England Governors’ Conference, Inc. 
76 Summer Street, 2nd Floor 
Boston, MA  02110-1226 
 
 
