Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
EXHIBIT ID 
ISO NEW ENGLAND BILLING POLICY 
 
Table of Contents 
 
SECTION 1 – OVERVIEW 
SECTION 2 – TIMING AND CONTENT OF STATEMENTS  
SECTION 3 – PAYMENT PROCEDURES 
SECTION 4 – LATE PAYMENT CHARGES; LATE PAYMENT ACCOUNTS  
SECTION 5 – SHORTFALL FUNDING ARRANGEMENT; PAYMENT DEFAULT SHORTFALL  
 
FUND 
SECTION 6 – BILLING DISPUTE PROCEDURES 
SECTION 7 – WEEKLY BILLING PRINCIPLES FOR NON-HOURLY CHARGES  
 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
 
EXHIBIT ID ISO NEW ENGLAND BILLING POLICY 
 
SECTION 1 – OVERVIEW  
 
Section 1.1 – Scope. The objective of this ISO New England Billing Policy is to define the billing 
and payment procedures to be utilized in administering charges and payments due under the 
Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff and the ISO Participants Agreement, in each case as 
amended, modified, supplemented and restated from time to time (collectively, the “Governing 
Documents”).  Capitalized terms used but not defined in the ISO New England Billing Policy 
shall have the meanings specified in Section I.  The ISO New England Billing Policy applies to 
the ISO, the Market Participants, Non-Market Participant Transmission Customers, PTOs, and 
Market Participants that transact only in the FTR Auction (“FTR-Only Customers”) (referred to 
herein collectively as the “Covered Entities” and individually as a “Covered Entity”) for billing 
and payments procedures for  amounts due under the Governing Documents, including without 
limitation those procedures related to the New England Markets. As reflected and specified in 
Section 3 hereof, the ISO’s obligation to make Payments (as defined below) is contingent on its 
receipt of sufficient aggregate Charges (as defined below) (or in cases of defaults in Covered 
Entities’ payments of Charges, on the ISO’s drawdowns under the ISO New England Financial 
Assurance Policy or recovery using the mechanisms specified in Section 3, 4 and 5 hereof).  
 
Section 1.2 – Financial Transaction Conventions. The following conventions have been adopted  
in defining sums of money to be paid or received under the ISO New England Billing Policy:  
 
a)  
The term “Charge” refers to a sum of money due from a Covered Entity to the 
ISO, either in its individual capacity or as billing and collection agent for 
NEPOOL pursuant to the Participants Agreement.  
 
b)  
The term “Payment” refers to a sum of money due to a Covered Entity from the 
ISO.  Amounts due to and from the ISO include amounts collected and paid by 
the ISO as billing and collection agent for NEPOOL pursuant to the Participants 
Agreement.  
 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
c)  
Where a Covered Entity’s total Charges exceed its total Payments for all amounts 
being billed together in a billing period, the ISO shall issue an “Invoice” for the 
net Charge owed by such Covered Entity.  
 
d) 
Where a Covered Entity’s total Payments exceed its total Charges for all amounts 
being billed together in a billing period, the ISO shall issue a “Remittance 
Advice” for the net Payment owed to the Covered Entity. Invoices and 
Remittance Advices are collectively referred to herein as “Statements.”  
 
Section 1.3 – General Process. Except for special billings, as described in Section 1.4 below, the 
billing process is performed (i) twice weekly for each complete-day settlement amount for the 
hourly charges and payments for Real-Time Energy and Day-Ahead Energy and for each 
complete-day settlement amount for the hourly charges and payments for Real-Time Operating 
Reserve, Forward Reserves, Regulation service, Emergency Sales, Emergency Purchases, Net 
Commitment Period Compensation, daily Forward Capacity Market charges and payments 
(“Daily FCM Charges”), and Inventoried Energy Program charges and payments under Section 
III, Appendix K of the ISO Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff (all such charges and 
payments described in this clause (i) being referred to collectively as the “Hourly Charges”); (ii) 
monthly for all other charges and payments, including without limitation charges relating to the 
monthly markets, the monthly Forward Capacity Market (exclusive of settlements included in the 
Hourly Charges) and other ancillary services, Participant Expenses, charges under Section IV of 
the ISO Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff, monthly meter adjustments, Qualification 
Process Cost Reimbursement Deposits (including the annual true-up of those Qualification 
Process Cost Reimbursement Deposits), state sales tax and related charges, any pass-through 
charges where the ISO acts as agent (including communications related charges, Open Access 
Same-Time Information System related charges, and fees related to the Shortfall Funding 
Arrangement), and charges under the OATT (other than charges arising under Schedules 1, 8, 
and 9 to the OATT, which charges are addressed in clause (iii) below) (all such charges and 
payments described in this clause (ii) being referred to collectively as (“Non-Hourly Charges” 
and, together with Hourly Charges, as “ISO Charges”), except in the case of Covered Entities 
who have requested and received a weekly payment arrangement for Non-Hourly Charges under 
the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy that is Exhibit IA to Section I of the ISO 
Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff (the “ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy”); 
and (iii) monthly for all charges and payments under Schedules 1, 8 and 9 to the OATT (all such 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
charges and payments described in this clause (iii) being referred to collectively as “Transmission 
Charges”).  There are two major steps in the billing process:  
 
a)  
Statement Issuance. The ISO will issue an Invoice or Remittance Advice 
showing the net amounts due from or owed to a Covered Entity.  This Statement 
is determined from the preliminary statements of the New England Markets, 
applicable the ISO Charges and/or Transmission Charges due under the 
Governing Documents (including amounts due under the ISO New England 
Financial Assurance Policy), as well as applicable adjustments.    Prior to January 
1 of any calendar year, the ISO will post or make available a list of the dates in 
the new calendar year on which Statements will be issued, due and paid.  Billing 
and payment holidays will be the same as the ISO’s settlement holidays, as listed 
on the ISO’s website from time to time.  
 
b)  
Electronic Funds Transfer (“EFT”). EFTs related to Invoices and Remittance 
Advices are performed in a two-step process, as described below, in which all 
Invoices are paid first and all Remittance Advices are paid later.  
 
Section 1.4  – Special Billings. In addition to the regular billing process described above, the ISO 
will issue special, extraordinary Statements as and when required under the Governing 
Documents or in order to adjust for special circumstances.  Such Statements shall be payable in 
accordance with the instructions set forth therein.  
 
Section 1.5  – Conflicts with Governing Documents. Except as set forth herein, to the extent any 
provision hereof conflicts with any provision of any Governing Document, the provision in the 
Governing Document shall govern.  
 
SECTION 2 - TIMING AND CONTENT OF STATEMENTS.  
 
Section 2.1  –  Statements for Hourly Charges. On each Monday and each Wednesday or on the 
following Business Day if such Monday or Wednesday is not a Business Day, the ISO shall 
provide electronically to each Covered Entity a Statement showing all complete-day settlement 
amounts for each of the Hourly Charges incurred and not reflected on a previously issued 
Statement.  Each such Statement will cover only days with complete settled data.  Accordingly, 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
some Statements may have fewer days of settled data for certain Hourly Charges if fewer days 
have been settled for those Hourly Charges on the morning of the day that such Statements are 
issued; a following Statement may have more days of settled data for those Hourly Charges when 
it becomes possible to catch up on the settled data.  Statements will include contiguous month-to-
month hourly market billing data and will have separate line items for any hourly market data that 
may cross calendar months.  For example, if a Statement’s billing period includes May 30 
through June 2, and all of those days are fully settled, the June 8 Statement would have one line 
item for the period May 30 to May 31 and one line item for the period June 1 to June 2. The Job 
Aid on the ISO web site will be updated weekly for any information necessary to be distributed 
through that medium.  
 
Section 2.2  – Monthly Statements for Non-Hourly Charges. The first Statement issued on a 
Monday after the ninth of a calendar month will include both the Hourly Charges for the relevant 
billing period and Non-Hourly Charges for the immediately preceding calendar month 
(hereinafter sometimes referred to as a “Monthly Statement”).  Resettlements determined in 
accordance with the procedures set forth in Market Rule 1 will be included in the monthly 
Statement for Non-Hourly Charges.  
 
Section 2.3  –  Statements for Weekly Billing Non-Hourly Charges. The ISO shall implement any 
weekly billing arrangements for Non-Hourly Charges effected under the ISO New England 
Financial Assurance Policy in accordance therewith and with the procedures set forth in Section 7 
below.  
 
Section 2.4  – Contents of Statements. Each Statement for Hourly and Non-Hourly Charges will 
include all of the following line items that are applicable to the Covered Entity receiving such 
Statement for the period to which such Statement relates:  
 
a)  
Invoice or Remittance Advice Amount. The net amount of all Charges and 
Payments owed by or due to a Covered Entity for the relevant Statement.  The 
ISO shall issue an Invoice where the Covered Entity owes monies.  The ISO shall 
issue a Remittance Advice where the Covered Entity is owed monies.  
 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
b)  
OATT Charges and Payments. The Charges owed by and the Payments owed to 
the Covered Entity under the OATT other than Transmission Charges, which are 
billed separately under Section 2.5 below.  
 
c)  
ISO Self-Funding Charges. The Charges owed by the Covered Entity under 
Section IV of the Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff, categorized by the 
section or schedule under which such Charges arise.  
 
d)  
Markets Charges and Payments. The Hourly Charges owed by and the Payments 
for Hourly Charges owed to the Covered Entity as a result of transactions in each 
of the New England Markets administered by the ISO under Section III of the 
Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff.  
 
e)  
Monthly Forward Capacity Market Charges and Payments.  The Non-Hourly 
Charges owed by and the Payments for Non-Hourly Charges owed to the 
Covered Entity as a result of Capacity Performance Payments and other 
transactions in the Forward Capacity Market.  
 
f)  
Participant Expenses. As defined in the Participants Agreement, the Covered 
Entity’s share of costs and expenses that are incurred pursuant to authorization of 
the Participants Committee and are not considered costs and expenses of ISO.  
 
g)  
[Reserved for Future Use]  
 
h)  
Other Amounts due under the Participants Agreement. The Charges owed by or 
the Payments owed to the Covered Entity under the Participants Agreement to 
the extent that those amounts are not included in items (b)-(g) above.  
 
i)  
Other Non-Hourly Charges, Payments or Adjustments. Any other Non-Hourly 
Charges, Payments for Non-Hourly Charges, or adjustments owed by or to the 
Covered Entity that are not included in items (b)-(h) above.  These items may be 
due to retroactive billing adjustments, late payment fees, penalties or other items 
collectible under the Governing Documents.  
 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
j)  
Billing Periods. The billing period (from and to dates) covered for each line item 
on the Statement.  The billing periods for the various line items are not 
necessarily the same because of differences in timing of settlements and because 
of retroactive adjustments.  
 
k) 
Payment Due Date and Time. If the Statement is an Invoice, the date and time on 
which the net amount due is to be received by the ISO.   
 
l) 
Wire Transfer Instructions. Details including the account number, bank name, 
routing number and electronic transfer instructions which, in the case of an 
Invoice, will be for the ISO account to which ISO Charges owed by the Covered 
Entity are to be paid or, in the case of a Remittance Advice, will be for the 
Covered Entity’s account to which the ISO shall remit Payments for ISO Charges 
owed to that Covered Entity (as previously provided to the ISO by such Covered 
Entity).   
 
Section 2.5  – Monthly Statements for Transmission Charges.  On the same date when each 
Monthly Statement is issued, the ISO shall provide electronically to each Covered Entity owing 
or owed any Transmission Charges for the preceding month a Statement (which may be 
combined with that Monthly Statement) showing all of the Transmission Charges for that 
Covered Entity for that preceding month (hereinafter sometimes referred to as a “Transmission 
Statement”).  Any resettlements of Transmission Charges will also be included on the 
Transmission Statement.  Each Transmission Statement will also include: (i) the billing month 
covered by the Transmission Statement; (ii) if the Transmission Statement is an Invoice, the date 
and time on which the net amount due is to be received by the ISO; and (iii) details including the 
account number, bank name, routing number and electronic transfer instructions which, in the 
case of an Invoice, will be for the ISO account to which Transmission Charges owed by the 
Covered Entity are to be paid or, in the case of a Remittance Advice, will be for the Covered 
Entity’s account to which the ISO shall remit Payments for Transmission Charges owed to that 
Covered Entity (as previously provided to the ISO by such Covered Entity). 
 
Section 2.6  – Certain Subsequent Adjustments to Previously Issued Statements.  
 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
a) 
Adjustments Requested by Covered Entities.  Covered Entities supplying 
Regional Network Load and other input data to the ISO for use by the ISO in 
developing Statements shall use reasonable care to assure that the data supplied is 
complete and accurate.  Should a Covered Entity supplying input data 
subsequently determine that the data supplied was incorrect, that Covered Entity 
shall notify the ISO promptly of the error and submit corrected data as soon as 
practicable.  All errors in input data for a calendar month shall be corrected in 
one submission.  If the error is detected and corrected data is provided within the 
time frames set forth below, the ISO will issue corrected Statements to reflect the 
newly supplied data. 
 
 
 
 
Type of Adjustment 
Corrected Data Must be Submitted By 
Adjustments to Monthly Regional Network Load 
Submissions 
20th day of the fourth (4th) month after the Regional 
Network Load Month 
Adjustments to Annual Revenue Requirements 
Submissions 
Annually during the rate development process, which is 
administered by the PTO Working Group 
Adjustments to Annual Transmission, Markets and 
Services Tariff Section II, Schedule I Submissions 
Annually during the rate development process, which is 
administered by the PTO Working Group 
 
If the data correction is not submitted within the applicable time frame set forth 
above, the obligation of the ISO to issue corrected Statements reflecting that 
adjustment shall be as set forth in a written re-billing protocol, developed in 
consultation with the NEPOOL Budget and Finance Subcommittee, and as may 
be amended from time to time in consultation with the NEPOOL Budget and 
Finance Subcommittee, and posted on the ISO website.  The re-billing protocol 
shall provide, for each category of adjustment listed above, whether and to what 
extent the adjustment shall be prospective or retroactive and the timing of the 
adjustment.  If the corrected data is not submitted within the applicable time 
frame, the ISO may assess each Covered Entity submitting corrected data on an 
untimely basis its costs in generating and issuing the corrected Statement.  The 
written re-billing protocol shall include a fee schedule for this purpose.  
 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
b) 
Adjustments Triggered by ISO Audit. The ISO will review the results of internal 
and outsourced audits with the PTO Administrative Committee and the 
Participants Committee or its delegee.  The reasonable costs to the ISO of the re-
billing shall be allocated to Schedule 1 of Section IV of the Transmission, 
Markets and Services Tariff.  
 
c)  
Adjustments Reflecting Compliance with an Order of the Commission or other 
Regulatory or Judicial Authority With Jurisdiction. Adjustments required to 
effect compliance with an order of the Commission (or any other regulatory or 
judicial authority with jurisdiction to interpret and/or enforce the provisions of 
the Governing Documents) shall be completed by the ISO in compliance with 
such order.  The costs of any such re-billing to the ISO shall be allocated among 
the Covered Entities in accordance with the provisions of the Transmission, 
Markets and Services Tariff.  
 
d)  
Nothing in this Section 2.6 shall affect resettlements of the New England 
Markets under Market Rule 1.  
 
SECTION 3 – PAYMENT PROCEDURES.  
 
All Payments (including prepayments as described in Section 3.1(e) below) made by the ISO will in all 
instances be made by EFT or in immediately available funds payable to the account designated to the ISO 
by the Covered Entity to which such Payment is due.  Payments made by Covered Entities shall be made 
by EFT to the account designated by the ISO.  
 
Section 3.1  – Invoice Payments.  
 
a) 
Payment Date. Except in the case of special billings, all Charges due shall be 
paid to and received by the ISO not later than the second (2nd) Business Day 
after the Invoice on which they appeared was issued (the “Invoice Date”) so long 
as the ISO issues such Invoice to the Covered Entities by 11:00 a.m. Eastern 
Time on the Invoice Date.  If the ISO issues an Invoice after 11:00 a.m. Eastern 
Time on the Invoice Date, the charges on such Invoice will be paid not later than 
the third (3rd) Business Day after such Invoice Date.  Notwithstanding the 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
foregoing, a Non-Market Participant Transmission Customer will in no event be 
required to make a payment on an Invoice any sooner than provided in Section II 
of the Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff.  
 
b) 
Right to Alter Payment Date. The ISO may establish the dates on which 
payments are due in the case of a special billing; provided, however, that, (i) 
payment on any special billing invoice shall not be due prior to the second (2nd) 
Business Day after the Invoice is issued, and (ii) a Non-Market Participant 
Transmission Customer shall not be required to make a payment on an Invoice 
any sooner than provided in Section II of the Transmission, Markets and Services 
Tariff.  
 
c) 
Payments Received by the ISO. Each Covered Entity owing monies to the ISO, 
either in the ISO’s individual capacity, or as agent for NEPOOL, shall remit the 
amount shown on its Invoice no later than the date such payment is due.  
Disputed Amounts shall be paid in accordance with clause (d) below.  All 
Invoices shall be paid by EFT, except that (i) Covered Entities (other than 
Unqualified New Market Participants and Returning Market Participants under 
the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy that are not Provisional 
Members) may, and any Provisional Member must, pay any Invoice for ISO 
Charges (but not for Transmission Charges)  by instructing the ISO (either on a 
case-by-case basis or pursuant to a standing instruction) in writing to draw on 
collateral maintained in a shareholder account created pursuant to the ISO New 
England Financial Assurance Policy provided by such Covered Entity under the 
ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy for such Invoice, provided that the 
failure of a Provisional Member to provide such an instruction to the ISO shall 
not, in and of itself, be deemed to be a default under the ISO New England 
Billing Policy and (ii) any Covered Entity may instruct the ISO to auto-debit an 
account identified by that Covered Entity to pay all Invoices issued by the ISO 
and in such case the Covered Entity will direct the bank or other institution 
holding that account to permit the ISO to auto-debit that account to pay all such 
Invoices on the date they are due.  Any instruction to pay any Invoice by drawing 
on collateral maintained in a shareholder account or to auto-debit an account 
must be received by at least 5:00 p.m. (Eastern Time) on the day that is two 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
Business Days prior to the Invoice Date.  The amount of a Covered Entity’s 
collateral maintained in a shareholder account will immediately be reduced by 
the amount drawn to pay an Invoice for ISO Charges pursuant to a standing 
instruction.  Nothing set forth in this section will reduce the financial assurance 
obligation otherwise applicable to any Covered Entity that instructs the ISO to 
draw on collateral maintained in a shareholder account or to auto-debit an 
account to pay an Invoice, and the ISO is not liable for any default resulting from 
a draw on collateral maintained in a shareholder account to pay an Invoice or for 
any overdraft charges resulting from any auto-debit.  
 
d) 
Payments Pending Resolution of a Dispute. Any Covered Entity that disputes the 
amount due, including an amount due for Participant Expenses, on any Invoice 
for service other than transmission service under Section II of the Transmission, 
Markets and Services Tariff shall pay to the ISO all amounts due on such 
Invoice, including any such Disputed Amounts.  Such payment shall in no way 
prejudice the right of such Covered Entity to seek reimbursement of such 
Disputed Amounts, including accrued interest on such amounts at the 
Commission’s standard rate, set forth in 18 C.F.R.  Section 35.19, pursuant to the 
Billing Dispute Resolution Procedures provided in Section 6 below.  
 
Any Covered Entity that disputes the amount due on any Invoice for transmission 
service under the Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff shall pay to the ISO 
all amounts not in dispute in accordance with the ISO New England Billing 
Policy and shall pay (or, in the case of an auto-debit payment or a payment for 
ISO Charges pursuant to a standing instruction, as described above, direct the 
ISO to pay) such Disputed Amounts into an independent escrow account 
designated by the ISO, which account shall be established at a banking institution 
acceptable to the ISO and the Covered Entity challenging the amount due and 
shall accrue interest at a prevailing market rate.  Such amount in dispute shall be 
held in escrow pending the resolution of such dispute in accordance with the 
applicable Governing Document(s).  The shortfall of funds available to pay 
Remittance Advices resulting from the amount in dispute being held in an escrow 
account shall be allocated among the Covered Entities according to the two-step 
allocation process described in Section 3.3 (for ISO Charges) and in Section 3.4 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
(for Transmission Charges) for the applicable type of Covered Entity disputing 
the Charges, subject to payment to all Covered Entities being allocated a portion 
of the shortfall, with applicable interest (if any), once the dispute is resolved with 
the funds in such escrow account or with other amounts provided by the Covered 
Entity losing such dispute.  
 
e) 
Prepayments. A Covered Entity may prepay any Invoice, in whole or in part, 
according to the following procedures: 
 
(i)  
only two such prepayments shall be made by any Covered Entity in any calendar 
week; only five such prepayments shall be made in any rolling 365-day period;  
and no prepayments shall be made on a Friday;  
(ii)  
each prepayment will be applied only to the next subsequent Invoice issued;  
(iii)  
prepayments and payments for issued Invoices must be made in separate wire 
transfers;  
(iv)  
for purposes of calculating a Covered Entity’s financial assurance obligations 
under the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy, prepayments will be 
applied first to Hourly Charges, then any remaining prepayment will offset the 
Covered Entity’s financial assurance obligations on a dollar-for-dollar basis;  
(v) 
if ISO Charges and Transmission Charges are billed on separate Invoices, then 
separate prepayments must be made for those ISO Charges and Transmission 
Charges (the ISO will account for each prepayment separately and will only 
apply each prepayment to the designated Charges); 
(vi)  
if a prepayment exceeds the amount due on the next subsequent Invoice issued, 
then the prepayment will be applied to that Invoice first, and then to the extent 
any amount is left after paying that Invoice, the Covered Entity making that 
prepayment may direct at the time of the prepayment that the excess be deposited 
with its collateral maintained in a shareholder account created pursuant to the 
ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy, and if the Covered Entity does 
not direct the ISO to make that deposit, the excess will be returned to the 
Covered Entity. Under either circumstance, the deposit to the shareholder 
account or the return of excess funds will occur on the next date when the ISO 
pays Remittances; and  
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
(vii)  
all prepayments will be held in the ISO’s settlement account until the Invoice 
payments are due, and no interest will be paid to any Covered Entity on any 
prepayments provided by it.  
 
Section 3.2 – ISO Payment of Remittance Advice Amounts. The Payment Date for a Remittance 
Advice shall be the fourth (4th) Business Day following the date on which the Remittance Advice 
was issued (the “Remittance Advice Date”) so long as the ISO issues such Remittance Advice by 
11:00 a.m. Eastern Time on the Remittance Advice Date.  If the ISO issues a Remittance Advice 
after 11:00 a.m. Eastern Time on the Remittance Advice Date, the Payment Date for that 
Remittance Advice shall be the fifth (5th) Business Day after the Remittance Advice Date.  
 
Section 3.3 -Payment Default for ISO Charges. If the ISO, in its reasonable opinion, believes that 
all or any part of any amount of ISO Charges due to be paid to the ISO by any Covered Entity 
will not or has not been paid when due (other than in the case of (i) a payment dispute for any 
amount due for transmission service under the OATT or (ii) any amounts due for NEPOOL GIS 
API Fees) (the “Default Amount”), then the following procedures shall apply:  
 
a) 
Priority of Payments. The ISO shall use moneys received by it from Covered 
Entities for an Invoice for ISO Charges to pay all amounts due to the ISO under 
Section IV of the Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff, all amounts due to 
NEPOOL for Participant Expenses, and all amounts due to the ISO for acting as 
Project Manager for the generation information system (the “NEPOOL GIS”) 
before making any payments to any Covered Entities.  After paying all amounts 
due to the ISO and NEPOOL but prior to making any payments to any Covered 
Entities, the ISO shall use moneys received by it from Covered Entities for ISO 
Charges to pay all amounts due from NEPOOL to the entity or entities that 
develop, administer, operate and maintain the NEPOOL GIS (the “NEPOOL GIS 
Administrator”) for those services (other than NEPOOL GIS API Fees).  After 
paying all amounts due to the ISO and NEPOOL for Participant Expenses and all 
amounts due to the NEPOOL GIS Administrator for the development, 
administration, operation and maintenance of the NEPOOL GIS but prior to 
making any payments to any Covered Entities, the ISO shall use moneys 
received by it from Covered Entities for ISO Charges to pay any and all amounts 
due with respect to the Shortfall Funding Arrangement. NEPOOL GIS API Fees 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
shall only be paid to the NEPOOL GIS Administrator to the extent that each 
Covered Entity or NEPOOL Participant owing such NEPOOL GIS API Fees has 
paid the full amount of all ISO Charges due on the Statement on which such 
NEPOOL GIS API Fees appear.  
 
b) 
Use of Set-Offs. The ISO shall use any and all rights of set-off it has under the 
Governing Documents, including the ISO New England Financial Assurance 
Policy and the ISO New England Billing Policy against a defaulting Covered 
Entity with respect to ISO Charges due to that Covered Entity to the extent 
necessary to pay the Default Amount, together with any interest accrued thereon 
and any late charges assessed under the Governing Documents, including the ISO 
New England Financial Assurance Policy, due from such Covered Entity.  
 
c) 
Enforcing the Security of a Defaulting Party. If and to the extent that the 
procedure described in clause (b) above is insufficient to effect payment of the 
Default Amount and all interest accrued thereon and late charges assessed under 
the Governing Documents, including the ISO New England Financial Assurance 
Policy, the ISO shall use the financial assurance(s) provided by the defaulting 
Covered Entity under the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy to the 
extent necessary to pay the Default Amount and such interest and late charges.  
Any use of financial assurance(s) shall be undertaken in compliance with the ISO 
New England Financial Assurance Policy.  
 
d) 
Action Against a Defaulting Party. If and to the extent that the procedures 
described in clauses (b) and (c) above are insufficient to effect payment of the 
Default Amount and all interest accrued thereon and late charges assessed under 
the Governing Documents, including the ISO New England Financial Assurance 
Policy, the ISO shall take appropriate actions to recover the Default Amount and 
such accrued interest and late charges, which actions may include, without 
limitation, initiating proceedings in accordance with the appropriate dispute 
resolution mechanisms or actions with Covered Entities or before the 
Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction against the defaulting Covered 
Entity.  Before initiating any such proceedings, the ISO shall consult with the 
Chair of the NEPOOL Budget and Finance Subcommittee or NEPOOL counsel.  
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
Any amounts incurred by the ISO or any Market Participant in connection with 
any such action or proceeding shall be paid by the defaulting Covered Entity.  
 
e) 
Late Payment Account. If and to the extent that the procedures described in 
clauses (b), (c) and (d) above are insufficient to effect payment of the Default 
Amount (but not interest accrued thereon and late charges assessed under the 
Governing Documents, including the ISO New England Financial Assurance 
Policy) by the time the corresponding Payment to the Covered Entities is due, the 
ISO shall withdraw from the Late Payment Account, as that term is defined in 
Section 4 of the ISO New England Billing Policy, an amount equal to such 
unpaid Default Amount, to the extent that such amount is available in the Late 
Payment Account, and shall apply such amount to any shortfall in Payments 
resulting from the Default Amount not being paid.  To the extent that the amount 
on deposit in the Late Payment Account on any date is insufficient to pay all 
Unsecured Default Amounts and Uncovered Default Amounts (each as defined 
below) on that date, the amount in the Late Payment Account shall first be 
applied to Uncovered Default Amounts on that date and, once cash has been 
applied to all Uncovered Default Amounts, then such amount shall be applied to 
Unsecured Default Amounts on that date, in each case pro rata based on the total 
Uncovered Default Amounts on or total Unsecured Default Amounts 
outstanding.  Amounts withdrawn from the Late Payment Account and applied 
toward any shortfall resulting from the Default Amount shall not relieve the 
defaulting Covered Entity of its obligation to pay such Default Amount.  If and to 
the extent that such Default Amount, interest thereon and/or late charges with 
respect thereto are subsequently collected (including as a result of the use of a 
financial assurance under the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy or 
through actions or proceedings against the defaulting Covered Entity), such 
amounts shall first be used to pay Covered Entities for the amount of such 
Default Amount allocated to them under clauses (h), (i) and (j) below, with 
interest thereon, and then, after all such amounts have been paid to Covered 
Entities, such Default Amount, interest and/or late charges shall be deposited into 
the Late Payment Account in accordance with Section 4 of the ISO New England 
Billing Policy.  
 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
f) 
Payment Default Shortfall Fund. To the extent that the procedures described in 
clauses (b), (c), (d) and (e) above are insufficient to effect payment of the Default 
Amount (but not interest accrued thereon and late charges assessed under the 
Governing Documents, including the ISO New England Financial Assurance 
Policy) the ISO will draw on the Shortfall Funding Arrangement to the extent the 
Shortfall Funding Arrangement is available at the time, and to the extent the 
Shortfall Funding Arrangement is not available at the time, the ISO will 
withdraw from the Payment Default Shortfall Fund, an amount equal to such 
unpaid Default Amount and shall apply such amount to the shortfall in Payments 
resulting from the Default Amount not being paid.  To the extent that the amount 
on deposit in the Payment Default Shortfall Fund on any date is insufficient to 
pay all Unsecured Default Amounts, Uncovered Default Amounts, Unsecured 
Transmission Default Amounts and Uncovered Transmission Default Amounts 
(each as defined below) on that date (after applying all amounts in the Late 
Payment Account for defaults on ISO Charges and all amounts in the 
Transmission Late Payment Account for defaults on Transmission Charges on 
that date), the amount in the Payment Default Shortfall Fund on that date shall 
first be applied to Uncovered Default Amounts on that date and, once cash has 
been applied to all Uncovered Default Amounts, then such amount shall be 
applied to Unsecured Default Amounts on that date and, once cash has been 
applied to all Uncovered Default Amounts and all Unsecured Default Amounts, 
then such amount shall be applied to Uncovered Transmission Default Amounts 
on that date and, once cash has been applied to all Uncovered Default Amounts, 
Unsecured Default Amounts and Uncovered Transmission Default Amounts, 
then such amount shall be applied to Unsecured Transmission Default Amounts 
on that date, in each case pro rata based on the total Uncovered Default Amounts, 
total Unsecured Default Amounts, total Uncovered Transmission Default 
Amounts or total Unsecured Transmission Default Amounts outstanding. 
Amounts drawn on the Shortfall Funding Arrangement and/or withdrawn from 
the Payment Default Shortfall Fund and applied to any shortfall resulting from 
the Default Amount shall not relieve the defaulting Covered Entity of its 
obligation to pay such Default Amount.  If and to the extent that a Default 
Amount which is paid through a draw on the Shortfall Funding Arrangement 
and/or through a withdrawal from the Payment Default Shortfall Fund, interest 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
on such a Default Amount and/or late charges with respect to such a Default 
Amount are subsequently collected (including as a result of the use of a financial 
assurance under the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy or through 
actions or proceedings against the Covered Entity), such amounts shall be paid to 
certain of the Covered Entities as set forth in Section 5.4 below.  
 
g) 
Congestion Revenue Fund. If during any billing period congestion payments 
exceed congestion charges under Manual 28 (hereinafter a “Congestion 
Shortfall”), such that there is a shortfall in the total settlement for that week due 
to congestion, the ISO will draw from the Congestion Revenue Fund established 
and funded under Manual 28 to make up for the shortfall.  To the extent there are 
insufficient funds in the Congestion Revenue Fund to cover that Congestion 
Shortfall, the ISO will recover the uncovered Congestion Shortfall pursuant to 
the allocation process set forth in Manual 28, Section 6.  The ISO will true-up 
amounts drawn for Congestion Shortfalls on a monthly basis and reflect that true-
up in the Statements reflecting Non-Hourly Charges.  
 
h) 
Reduction of Payments and Increases in Charges for Unsecured Municipal 
Market Participants  
 
(i) 
If and to the extent that (A) the defaulting Covered Entity is a Municipal Market 
Participant (as defined in the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy) with 
a Market Credit Limit or a Transmission Credit Limit of greater than $0 under 
the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy (an “Unsecured Municipal 
Market Participant”) and (B) the procedures described in clauses (b), (c), (d), (e), 
(f) and (g) above do not yield sufficient funds to pay all Remittance Advice 
amounts for ISO Charges in full (after payment of amounts due to the ISO, to 
NEPOOL for Participant Expenses, and to the NEPOOL GIS Administrator for 
amounts due to the NEPOOL GIS Administrator other than for NEPOOL GIS 
API Fees and after payment of any amounts due with respect to the Shortfall 
Funding Arrangement, in accordance with clause (a) above) on the date such 
Payments are due, the ISO shall reduce Payments to all Unsecured Municipal 
Market Participants owed monies for ISO Charges for the billing period to which 
the payment default relates (the “Default Period”), pro rata based on the ISO 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
Charges owed to those Unsecured Municipal Market Participants, to the extent 
necessary to clear its accounts for ISO Charges due to Unsecured Municipal 
Market Participants by the close of banking business on the date such Payments 
are due; provided, however, that the total amount of reduced Payments under this 
Section 3.3(h)(i) shall not exceed the defaulting Unsecured Municipal Market 
Participant’s Market Credit Limit under the ISO New England Financial 
Assurance Policy (such total amount of reduced Payments being referred to as 
the “Unsecured Municipal Default Amount”).  As funds attributable to an 
Unsecured Municipal Default Amount are received by the ISO (including 
amounts received through financial assurances provided under the ISO New 
England Financial Assurance Policy or through actions or proceedings 
commenced against the defaulting Covered Entity) prior to the next billing 
period’s Statements being distributed, such funds, together with any interest and 
late charges collected on the applicable Unsecured Municipal Default Amount, 
shall be distributed pro rata to the Unsecured Municipal Market Participants that 
did not receive the full amount of their Payments as a result of such Unsecured 
Municipal Default Amount not being paid, up to the full amount that such 
Unsecured Municipal Market Participants did not receive as a result of such 
Unsecured Municipal  Default Amount not being paid, with interest thereon.  
(ii)  
To the extent that any Unsecured Municipal Default Amount remains unpaid to 
Unsecured Municipal Market Participants on the date that Statements are 
distributed to Covered Entities in the billing period immediately following the 
Default Period, the Unsecured Municipal Default Amount remaining unpaid shall 
be reallocated among all of the Unsecured Municipal Market Participants 
receiving Statements for ISO charges for the Default Period (other than the 
Unsecured Municipal Market Participant defaulting on its payment obligations), 
pro rata based, for each Unsecured Municipal Market Participant being allocated 
a share of the Unsecured Municipal Default Amount remaining unpaid, on the 
sum of (i) all ISO Charges due from such Unsecured Municipal Market 
Participant that are reflected on its Statement for the Default Period and (ii) all 
Payments for ISO Charges due to such Unsecured Municipal Market Participant 
that are reflected on its Statement for the Default Period, without giving any 
effect to the process of netting Charges against Payments on each Statement that 
is the result of the ISO’s single billing system.  Thus, by way of example, an 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
Unsecured Municipal Market Participant with $2,000 of ISO Charges and no 
Payments on its Statement for the Default Period and an Unsecured Municipal 
Market Participant with $1,000 of Charges and $1,000 of Payments for ISO 
Charges on its Statement for the Default Period would be allocated an equal 
share of the unpaid Unsecured Municipal Default Amount under this clause 
(h)(ii).  Each Unsecured Municipal Market Participant that received a Statement 
for the Default Period shall have the amount of its Invoice or Remittance Advice 
in the billing period immediately following the Default Period adjusted as 
necessary to reflect its obligation for the Unsecured Municipal Default Amount 
remaining unpaid under this clause (h)(ii).  As funds attributable to an Unsecured 
Municipal Default Amount are received by the ISO (including amounts received 
through financial assurances provided under the ISO New England Financial 
Assurance Policy or through actions or proceedings commenced against the 
defaulting Covered Entity) after such adjusted Statements are distributed, such 
funds, together with any interest and late charges collected on the applicable 
Unsecured Municipal Default Amount, shall be distributed to the Unsecured 
Municipal Market Participants pro rata based on their allocation of the Unsecured 
Municipal Default Amount under this clause (h)(ii), up to the full amount of such 
Unsecured Municipal Default Amount allocated to each such Unsecured 
Municipal Market Participant, with interest thereon.  
(iii) 
An Unsecured Municipal Market Participant will not be allocated any Unsecured 
Municipal Default Amounts under this Section 3.3(h) for any Default Period if, at 
the start of the calendar year in which the applicable Default Period occurred, 
that Unsecured Municipal Market Participant provided the ISO with a written 
request to opt out of that allocation of Unsecured Municipal Default Amounts 
and that Unsecured Municipal Market Participant provides the ISO with 
additional financial assurance in the full amount of all of its “Financial Assurance 
Obligations” under the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy at all times 
during that calendar year. 
 
i) 
Reduction of Payments and Increases in Charges for Unsecured Non-Municipal 
Covered Entities. 
(i)   
If and to the extent that (A) the defaulting Covered Entity (x) is not a Municipal 
Market Participant or a Non-Market Participant Transmission Customer and (y) 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
has a Market Credit Limit or Transmission Credit Limit of greater than $0 under 
the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy (each such Covered Entity 
being referred to herein as an “Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entity”) and 
(B) the procedures described in clauses (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), and (g) above do not 
yield sufficient funds to pay all Remittance Advice amounts for ISO Charges in 
full (after payment of amounts due to the ISO, to NEPOOL for Participant 
Expenses, and to the NEPOOL GIS Administrator for amounts due to the 
NEPOOL GIS Administrator other than for NEPOOL GIS API Fees and after 
payment of any amounts due with respect to the Shortfall Funding Arrangement, 
in accordance with clause (a) above) on the date such Payments are due, the ISO 
shall reduce Payments to all Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entities owed 
monies for ISO Charges for the applicable Default Period, pro rata based on the 
ISO Charges owed to those Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entities, to the 
extent necessary to clear its accounts for ISO Charges due to Unsecured Non-
Municipal Covered Entities by the close of banking business on the date such 
Payments are due; provided, however, that the total amount of reduced Payments 
under this Section 3.3(i)(i) shall not exceed the defaulting Unsecured Non-
Municipal Covered Entity’s Market Credit Limit under the ISO New England 
Financial Assurance Policy (such total amount of reduced Payments being 
referred to as the “Unsecured Non-Municipal Default Amount”).  As funds 
attributable to an Unsecured Non-Municipal Default Amount are received by the 
ISO (including amounts received through financial assurances provided under the 
ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy or through actions or proceedings 
commenced against the defaulting Covered Entity) prior to the next billing 
period’s Statements being distributed, such funds, together with any interest and 
late charges collected on the applicable Unsecured Non-Municipal Default 
Amount, shall be distributed pro rata to the Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered 
Entities that did not receive the full amount of their Payments as a result of such 
Unsecured Non-Municipal Default Amount not being paid, up to the full amount 
that such Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entities did not receive as a result 
of such Unsecured Non-Municipal Default Amount not being paid, with interest 
thereon. 
(ii) 
To the extent that any Unsecured Non-Municipal Default Amount remains 
unpaid to Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entities on the date that Statements 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
are distributed to Covered Entities in the billing period immediately following 
the Default Period, the Unsecured Non-Municipal Default Amount remaining 
unpaid shall be reallocated among all of the Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered 
Entities receiving Statements for ISO Charges for the Default Period (other than 
the Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entity defaulting on its payment 
obligations), pro rata based, for each Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entity 
being allocated a share of the Unsecured Non-Municipal Default Amount 
remaining unpaid, on the sum of (i) all ISO Charges due from such Unsecured 
Non-Municipal Covered Entity that are reflected on its Statement for the Default 
Period and (ii) all Payments for ISO Charges due to such Unsecured Non-
Municipal Covered Entity that are reflected on its Statement for the Default 
Period, without giving any effect to the process of netting Charges against 
Payments on each Statement that is the result of the ISO’s single billing system.  
Thus, by way of example, an Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entity with 
$2,000 of ISO Charges and no Payments on its Statement for the Default Period 
and an Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entity with $1,000 of Charges and 
$1,000 of Payments for ISO Charges on its Statement for the Default Period 
would be allocated an equal share of the unpaid Unsecured Non-Municipal 
Default Amount under this clause (i)(ii).  Each Unsecured Non-Municipal 
Covered Entity that received a Statement for the Default Period shall have the 
amount of its Invoice or Remittance Advice in the billing period immediately 
following the Default Period adjusted as necessary to reflect its obligation for the 
Unsecured Non-Municipal Default Amount remaining unpaid under this clause 
(i)(ii).  As funds attributable to an Unsecured Non-Municipal Default Amount are 
received by the ISO (including amounts received through financial assurances 
provided under the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy or through 
actions or proceedings commenced against the defaulting Covered Entity) after 
such adjusted Statements are distributed, such funds, together with any interest 
and late charges collected on the applicable Unsecured Non-Municipal Default 
Amount, shall be distributed to the Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entities 
pro rata based on their allocation of the Unsecured Non-Municipal Default 
Amount under this clause (i)(ii), up to the full amount of such Unsecured Non-
Municipal Default Amount allocated to each such Unsecured Non-Municipal 
Covered Entity, with interest thereon. 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
(iii) 
An Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entity will not be allocated any 
Unsecured Non-Municipal Default Amounts under this Section 3.3(i) for any 
Default Period if, at the start of the calendar year in which the applicable Default 
Period occurred, that Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entity provided the 
ISO with a written request to opt out of that allocation of Unsecured Non-
Municipal Default Amounts and that Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entity 
provides the ISO with additional financial assurance in the full amount of all of 
its “Financial Assurance Obligations” under the ISO New England Financial 
Assurance Policy at all times during that calendar year.  
 
j)  
Reduction of Payments and Increase in Charges for Other Covered Entities.  
(i) 
If and to the extent that (A) the defaulting Covered Entity is not an Unsecured 
Municipal Market Participant or an Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entity 
(referred to together herein as an “Unsecured Covered Entity”) or the Default 
Amount exceeds the Unsecured Municipal Default Amount or the Unsecured 
Non-Municipal Default Amount (referred to together herein as the “Unsecured 
Default Amount”) for that Covered Entity and (B) the procedures described in 
clauses (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), and (h) or (i) (if applicable) above do not yield 
sufficient funds to pay all Remittance Advice amounts for ISO Charges in full 
(after payment of amounts due to the ISO, to NEPOOL for Participant Expenses, 
and to the NEPOOL GIS Administrator for amounts due to the NEPOOL GIS 
Administrator other than for NEPOOL GIS API Fees and after payment of any 
amounts due with respect to the Shortfall Funding Arrangement, in accordance 
with clause (a) above) on the date such Payments are due, the ISO shall reduce 
Payments to those Covered Entities owed monies for ISO Charges for that 
Default Period, pro rata based on the amounts owed to all Covered Entities, to the 
extent necessary to clear its accounts for ISO Charges by the close of banking 
business on the date such Payments are due (after giving effect to clause (h) or (i) 
above if applicable) (the amount of such reduction in Payments for ISO Charges 
after giving effect to clause (h) or (i) above (if applicable) is referred to herein as 
the “Uncovered Default Amount”).  For the avoidance of doubt, the Uncovered 
Default Amount is equal to the Default Amount minus any Unsecured Default 
Amount.  As funds attributable to an Uncovered Default Amount are received by 
the ISO (including amounts received through financial assurances provided under 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy or through actions or 
proceedings commenced against the defaulting Covered Entity) prior to the next 
billing period’s Statements being distributed, such funds, together with any 
interest and late charges collected on the applicable Default Amount, shall be 
distributed pro rata to the Covered Entities that did not receive the full amount of 
their Payments as a result of such Uncovered Default Amount not being paid, up 
to the full amount that such Covered Entities did not receive as a result of such 
Uncovered Default Amount not being paid, with interest thereon.  
(ii) 
To the extent that any amount of an Uncovered Default Amount remains unpaid 
to Covered Entities on the date that Statements are distributed to Covered Entities 
in the billing period immediately following the Default Period, the Uncovered 
Default Amount remaining unpaid shall be reallocated among all of the Covered 
Entities receiving Statements for ISO Charges for the Default Period (other than 
the Covered Entity defaulting on its payment obligations), pro rata based, for 
each Covered Entity being allocated a share of the Uncovered Default Amount 
remaining unpaid, on the sum of (i) all ISO Charges due from such Covered 
Entity that are reflected on its Statement for the Default Period and (ii) all 
Payments for ISO Charges due to such Covered Entity that are reflected on its 
Statement for the Default Period, without giving any effect to the process of 
netting Charges against Payments on each Statement that is the result of the 
ISO’s single billing system.  Thus, by way of example, a Covered Entity with 
$2,000 of ISO Charges and no Payments on its Statement for the Default Period 
and a Covered Entity with $1,000 of ISO Charges and $1,000 of Payments for 
ISO Charges on its Statement for the Default Period would be allocated an equal 
share of the unpaid Uncovered Default Amount under this clause (j)(ii).  Each 
Covered Entity that received a Statement for the Default Period shall have the 
amount of its Invoice or Remittance Advice in the billing period immediately 
following the Default Period adjusted as necessary to reflect its obligation for the 
Uncovered Default Amount remaining unpaid under this clause (j)(ii).  As funds 
attributable to an Uncovered Default Amount are received by the ISO (including 
amounts received through financial assurance provided under the ISO New 
England Financial Assurance Policy or through actions or proceedings 
commenced against the defaulting Covered Entity) after such adjusted 
Statements are distributed, such funds, together with any interest and late charges 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
collected on the applicable Uncovered Default Amount, shall be distributed to the 
Covered Entities pro rata based on their allocation of the Uncovered Default 
Amount under this clause (j) (ii), up to the full amount of such Uncovered 
Default Amount allocated to each such Covered Entity, with interest thereon.        
 
k) 
Order of Settlement. As amounts on Default Amounts are received by the ISO, 
the oldest outstanding ISO Charges will be settled first in the order of the 
creation of such debts. 
 
l)    
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Section 3.3, an unpaid amount shall 
not be considered a “Default Amount,” and the ISO will not take any of the 
actions described in the suspension provisions of the ISO New England Financial 
Assurance Policy or in this Section 3.3 with respect to that unpaid amount, if the 
total unpaid amount is attributable to Qualification Process Cost Reimbursement 
Deposits (including any annual true-up of those amounts) and/or NEPOOL GIS 
API Fees.  To the extent that a Covered Entity or a NEPOOL Participant pays 
only a part of an Invoice that includes a Charge for a Qualification Process Cost 
Reimbursement Deposit and/or a Charge for NEPOOL GIS API Fees, the unpaid 
amount shall first be allocated to the unpaid NEPOOL GIS API Fees, and then to 
that Qualification Process Cost Reimbursement Deposit, and other Charges on 
that Invoice will only be considered not to have been paid if the unpaid amount 
exceeds the amount of the Qualification Process Cost Reimbursement Deposit 
and any unpaid NEPOOL GIS API Fees. The sole consequence of a Covered 
Entity’s or a NEPOOL Participant’s failure to pay NEPOOL GIS API Fees, after 
application of any set-off rights against the Covered Entity or NEPOOL 
Participant and any financial assurance provided by that Covered Entity or 
NEPOOL Participant, shall be denial to that Covered Entity or NEPOOL 
Participant of access to any application programming interface pursuant to Rule 
3.9(b) of the operating rules of the NEPOOL GIS.  
 
Section 3.4 – Payment Default for Transmission Charges.  If the ISO, in its reasonable opinion, 
believes that all or any part of any amount of Transmission Charges due to be paid to the ISO by 
any Covered Entity will not or has not been paid when due (the “Transmission Default Amount”), 
then the following procedures shall apply: 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
 
a) 
Use of Set-Offs.  The ISO shall use any and all rights of set-off it has under the 
Governing Documents, including the ISO New England Financial Assurance 
Policy and the ISO New England Billing Policy, against a defaulting Covered 
Entity with respect to Transmission Charges due to that Covered Entity to the 
extent necessary to pay the Default Amount, together with any interest accrued 
thereon and any late charges assessed under the Governing Documents, including 
the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy, due from such Covered 
Entity. 
 
b) 
Enforcing the Security of a Defaulting Party.  If and to the extent that the 
procedure described in clause (a) above is insufficient to effect payment of the 
Transmission Default Amount and all interest accrued thereon and late charges 
assessed under the Governing Documents, including the ISO New England 
Financial Assurance Policy, the ISO shall use the financial assurance(s) provided 
by the defaulting Covered Entity under the ISO New England Financial 
Assurance Policy to the extent necessary to pay the Transmission Default 
Amount and such interest and late charges.  Any use of financial assurance(s) 
shall be undertaken in compliance with the ISO New England Financial 
Assurance Policy. 
 
c) 
Action Against a Defaulting Party.  If and to the extent that the procedures 
described in clauses (a) and (b) above are insufficient to effect payment of the 
Transmission Default Amount and all interest accrued theron and late charges 
assessed under the Governing Documents, including the ISO New England 
Financial Assurance Policy, the ISO shall take appropriate actions to recover the 
Transmission Default Amount and such accrued interest and late charges, which 
actions may include, without limitation, initiating proceedings in accordance with 
the appropriate dispute resolution mechanisms or actions with Covered Entities 
or before the Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction against the 
defaulting Covered Entity.  Before initiating any such proceedings, the ISO shall 
consult with the Chair of the NEPOOL Budget and Finance Subcommittee or 
NEPOOL counsel.  Any amounts incurred by the ISO or any Market Participant 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
in connection with any such action or proceeding shall be paid by the defaulting 
Covered Entity. 
 
d) 
Transmission Late Payment Account.  If and to the extent that the procedures 
described in clauses (a), (b) and (c) above are insufficient to effect payment of 
the Transmission Default Amount (but not interest accrued thereon and late 
charges assessed under the Governing Documents, including the ISO New 
England Financial Assurance Policy) by the time the corresponding Payment to 
the Covered Entities is due, the ISO shall withdraw from the Transmission Late 
Payment Account, as that term is defined in Section 4 of the ISO New England 
Billing Policy, an amount equal to such unpaid Transmission Default Amount, to 
the extent that such amount is available in the Transmission Late Payment 
Account, and shall apply such amount to any shortfall in Payments resulting from 
the Transmission Default Amount not being paid.  To the extent that the amount 
on deposit in the Transmission Late Payment Account on any date is insufficient 
to pay all Unsecured Transmission Default Amounts and Uncovered 
Transmission Default Amounts (each as defined below) on that date, the amount 
in the Transmission Late Payment Account shall first be applied to Uncovered 
Transmission Default Amounts on that date and, once cash has been applied to 
all Uncovered Transmission Default Amounts,  then such amount shall be 
applied to Unsecured Transmission Default Amounts on that date, in each case 
pro rata based on the total Uncovered Transmission Default Amounts or total 
Unsecured Transmission Default Amounts outstanding.  Amounts withdrawn 
from the Transmission Late Payment Account and applied toward any shortfall 
resulting from the Transmission Default Amount shall not relieve the defaulting 
Covered Entity of its obligation to pay such Transmission Default Amount.  If 
and to the extent that such Transmission Default Amount, interest thereon and/or 
late charges with respect thereto are subsequently collected (including as a result 
of the use of a financial assurance under the ISO New England Financial 
Assurance Policy or through actions or proceedings against the defaulting 
Covered Entity), such amounts shall first be used to pay Covered Entities for the 
amount of such Transmission Default Amount allocated to them under clause (f), 
(g) and (h) below, with interest thereon, and then, after all such amounts have 
been paid to Covered Entities, such Transmission Default Amount, interest 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
and/or late charges shall be deposited into the Transmission Late Payment 
Account in accordance with Section 4 of the ISO New England Billing Policy. 
 
e) 
Payment Default Shortfall Fund  To the extent that the procedures described in 
clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d) above are insufficient to effect payment of the 
Transmission Default Amount (but not interest accrued thereon and late charges 
assessed under the Governing Documents, including the ISO New England 
Financial Assurance Policy), the ISO will draw on the Shortfall Funding 
Arrangement to the extent the Shortfall Funding Arrangement is available at the 
time, and to the extent the Shortfall Funding Arrangement is not available at the 
time, the ISO will withdraw from the Payment Default Shortfall Fund, an amount 
equal to such unpaid Transmission Default Amount and shall apply such amount 
to the shortfall in Payments resulting from the Transmission Default Amount not 
being paid.  To the extent that the amount on deposit in the Payment Default 
Shortfall Fund on any date is insufficient to pay all Unsecured Default Amounts, 
Uncovered Default Amounts, Unsecured Transmission Default Amounts and 
Uncovered Transmission Default Amounts (each as defined herein) on that date 
(after applying all amounts in the Late Payment Account for defaults on ISO 
Charges and all amounts in the Transmission Late Payment Account for defaults 
on Transmission Charges on that date), the amount in the Payment Default 
Shortfall Fund on that date shall first be applied to Uncovered Default Amounts 
on that date and, once cash has been applied to all Uncovered Default Amounts, 
then such amount shall be applied to Unsecured Default Amounts on that date 
and, once cash has been applied to all Uncovered Default Amounts and all 
Unsecured Default Amounts, then such amount shall be applied to Uncovered 
Transmission Default Amounts on that date and, once cash has been applied to 
all Uncovered Default Amounts, Unsecured Default Amounts and Uncovered 
Transmission Default Amounts, then such amount shall be applied to Unsecured 
Transmission Default Amounts on that date, in each case pro rata based on the 
total Uncovered Default Amounts, total Unsecured Default Amounts, total 
Uncovered Transmission Default Amounts or total Unsecured Transmission 
Default Amounts outstanding.  Amounts drawn on the Shortfall Funding 
Arrangement and/or withdrawn from the Payment Default Shortfall Fund and 
applied to any shortfall resulting from the Transmission Default Amount shall 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
not relieve the defaulting Covered Entity of its obligation to pay such 
Transmission Default Amount.  If and to the extent that a Transmission Default 
Amount which is paid through a draw on the Shortfall Funding Arrangement 
and/or through a withdrawal from the Payment Default Shortfall Fund, interest 
on such a Transmission Default Amount and/or late charges with respect to such 
a Transmission Default Amount are subsequently collected (including as a result 
of the use of a financial assurance under the ISO New England Financial 
Assurance Policy or through actions or proceedings against the Covered Entity), 
such amounts shall be paid to certain of the Covered Entities as set forth in 
Section 5.4 below. 
 
f) 
Reduction of Payments and Increases in Transmission Charges for Unsecured 
Municipal Market Participants. 
(i) 
If and to the extent that (A) the defaulting Covered Entity is an Unsecured 
Municipal Market Participant and (B) the procedures described in clauses (a), 
(b), (c), (d), and (e) above do not yield sufficient funds to pay all Remittance 
Advice amounts for Transmission Charges in full on the date such Payments are 
due, the ISO shall reduce Payments to all Unsecured Municipal Market 
Participants owed monies for Transmission Charges for that billing period (the 
“Transmission Default Period”), pro rata based on the Transmission Charges 
owed to those Unsecured Municipal Market Participants, to the extent necessary 
to clear its accounts for Transmission Charges due to Unsecured Municipal 
Market Participants by the close of banking business on the date such Payments 
are due; provided, however, that the total amount of reduced Payments under this 
Section 3.4(f) shall not exceed the defaulting Unsecured Municipal Market 
Participant’s Transmission Credit Limit under the ISO New England Financial 
Assurance Policy (such total amount of reduced Payments being referred to as 
the “Unsecured Municipal Transmission Default Amount”).  As funds 
attributable to an Unsecured Municipal Transmission Default Amount are 
received by the ISO (including amounts received through financial assurances 
provided under the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy or through 
actions or proceedings commenced against the defaulting Covered Entity) prior 
to the next billing period’s Transmission Statements being distributed, such 
funds, together with any interest and late charges collected on the applicable 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
Unsecured Transmission Default Amount, shall be distributed pro rata to the 
Unsecured Municipal Market Participants that did not receive the full amount of 
their Payments as a result of such Unsecured Municipal Transmission Default 
Amount not being paid, up to the full amount that such Unsecured Municipal 
Market Participants did not receive as a result of such Unsecured Municipal 
Transmission Default Amount not being paid, with interest thereon. 
(ii) 
To the extent that any Unsecured Municipal Transmission Default Amount 
remains unpaid to Unsecured Municipal Market Participants on the date that 
Transmission Statements are distributed to Covered Entities in the billing period 
immediately following the Transmission Default Period, the Unsecured 
Municipal Transmission Default Amount remaining unpaid shall be reallocated 
among all of the Unsecured Municipal Market Participants receiving 
Transmission Statements for Transmission Charges for the Transmission Default 
Period (other than the Unsecured Municipal Market Participant defaulting on its 
payment obligations), pro rata based, for each Unsecured Municipal Market 
Participant being allocated a share of the Unsecured Municipal Transmission 
Default Amount remaining unpaid, on the sum of (i) all Transmission Charges 
due from such Unsecured Municipal Market Participant that are reflected on its 
Transmission Statement for the Transmission Default Period and (ii) all 
Payments for Transmission Charges due to such Unsecured Municipal Market 
participant that are reflected on its Transmission Statement for the Transmission 
Default Period, without giving any effect to the process of netting Charges 
against Payments on each Transmission Statement that is the result of the ISO’s 
single billing system.  Thus, by way of example, an Unsecured Municipal Market 
Participant with $2,000 of Transmission Charges and no Payments on its 
Transmission Statement for the Transmission Default Period and an Unsecured 
Municipal Market Participant with $1,000 of Transmission Charges and $1,000 
of Payments for Transmission Charges on its Transmission Statement for the 
Transmission Default Period would be allocated an equal share of the unpaid 
Unsecured Municipal Transmission Default Amount under this clause (f)(ii).  
Each Unsecured Municipal Market Participant that received a Transmission 
Statement for the Transmission Default Period shall have the amount of its 
Invoice or Remittance Advice in the billing period immediately following the 
Transmission Default Period adjusted as necessary to reflect its obligation for the 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
Unsecured Municipal Transmission Default Amount remaining unpaid under this 
clause (f)(ii).  As funds attributable to an Unsecured Municipal Transmission 
Default Amount are received by the ISO (including amounts received through 
financial assurances provided under the ISO New England Financial Assurance 
Policy or through actions or proceedings commenced against the defaulting 
Covered Entity) after such adjusted Transmission Statements are distributed, 
such funds, together with any interest and late charges collected on the applicable 
Unsecured Municipal Transmission Default Amount, shall be distributed to the 
Unsecured Municipal Market Participants pro rata based on their allocation of the 
Unsecured Municipal Transmission Default Amount under this clause (f)(ii), up 
to the full amount of such Unsecured Municipal Transmission Default Amount 
allocated to each such Unsecured Municipal Market Participant, with interest 
thereon. 
(iii) 
An Unsecured Municipal Market Participant will not be allocated any Unsecured 
Municipal Transmission Default Amounts under this Section 3.4(f) for any 
Transmission Default Period if, at the start of the calendar year in which the 
applicable Transmission Default Period occurred, that Unsecured Municipal 
Market Participant provided the ISO with a written request to opt out of that 
allocation of Unsecured Municipal Transmission Default Amounts and that 
Unsecured Municipal Market Participant provides the ISO with additional 
financial assurance in the full amount of all of its “Transmission Obligations” 
under the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy at all times during that 
calendar year. 
 
g) 
Reduction of Payments and Increases in Transmission Charges for Unsecured 
Non-Municipal Covered Entities. 
(i) 
If and to the extent that (A) the defaulting Covered Entity is an Unsecured Non-
Municipal Covered Entity and (B) the procedures described in clauses (a), (b), 
(c), (d), and (e) above do not yield sufficient funds to pay all Remittance Advice 
amounts for Transmission Charges in full on the date such Payments are due, the 
ISO shall reduce Payments to all Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entities 
owed monies for the applicable Transmission Default Period, pro rata based on 
the Transmission Charges owed to those Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered 
Entities, to the extent necessary to clear its accounts for Transmission Charges 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
due to Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entities by the close of banking 
business on the date such Payments are due; provided, however, that the total 
amount of reduced Payments under this Section 3.4(g) shall not exceed the 
defaulting Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entity’s Transmission Credit 
Limit under the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy (such total amount 
of reduced Payments being referred to as the “Unsecured Non-Municipal 
Transmission Default Amount”).  As funds attributable to an Unsecured Non-
Municipal Transmission Default Amount are received by the ISO (including 
amounts received through financial assurances provided under the ISO New 
England Financial Assurance Policy or through actions or proceedings 
commenced against the defaulting Covered Entity) prior to the next billing 
period’s Transmission Statements being distributed, such funds, together with 
any interest and late charges collected on the applicable Unsecured Non-
Municipal Transmission Default Amount, shall be distributed pro rata to the 
Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entities that did not receive the full amount 
of their Payments as a result of such Unsecured Non-Municipal Transmission 
Default Amount not being paid, up to the full amount that such Unsecured Non-
Municipal Covered Entities did not receive as a result of such Unsecured Non-
Municipal Transmission Default Amount not being paid, with interest thereon. 
(ii) 
To the extent that any Unsecured Non-Municipal Transmission Default Amount 
remains unpaid to Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entities on the date that 
Transmission Statements are distributed to Covered Entities in the billing period 
immediately following the Transmission Default Period, the Unsecured Non-
Municipal Transmission Default Amount remaining unpaid shall be reallocated 
among all of the Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entities receiving 
Transmission Statements for Transmission Charges for the Transmission Default 
Period (other than the Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entity defaulting on its 
payment obligations), pro rata based, for each Unsecured Non-Municipal 
Covered Entity being allocated a share of the Unsecured Non-Municipal 
Transmission Default Amount remaining unpaid, on the sum of (i) all 
Transmission Charges due from such Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entity 
that are reflected on its Transmission Statement for the Transmission Default 
Period and (ii) all Payments for Transmission Charges due to such Unsecured 
Non-Municipal Covered Entity that are reflected on its Transmission Statement 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
for the Transmission Default Period, without giving any effect to the process of 
netting Charges against Payments on each Transmission Statement that is the 
result of the ISO’s single billing system.  Thus, by way of example, an 
Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entity with $2,000 of Transmission Charges 
and no Payments on its Transmission Statement for the Transmission Default 
Period and an Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entity with $1,000 of 
Transmission Charges and $1,000 of Payments for Transmission Charges on its 
Transmission Statement for the Transmission Default Period would be allocated 
an equal share of the unpaid Unsecured Non-Municipal Transmission Default 
Amount under this clause (g)(ii).  Each Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered 
Entity that received a Transmission Statement for the Transmission Default 
Period shall have the amount of its Invoice or Remittance Advice in the billing 
period immediately following the Transmission Default Period adjusted as 
necessary to reflect its obligation for the Unsecured Non-Municipal Transmission 
Default Amount remaining unpaid under this clause (g)(ii).  As funds attributable 
to an Unsecured Non-Municipal Transmission Default Amount are received by 
the ISO (including amounts received through financial assurances provided under 
the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy or through actions or 
proceedings commenced against the defaulting Covered Entity) after such 
adjusted Transmission Statements are distributed, such funds, together with any 
interest and late charges collected on the applicable Unsecured Non-Municipal 
Transmission Default Amount, shall be distributed to the Unsecured Non-
Municipal Covered Entities pro rata based on their allocation of the Unsecured 
Non-Municipal Transmission Default Amount under this clause (g)(ii), up to the 
full amount of such Unsecured Non-Municipal Transmission Default Amount 
allocated to each such Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entity, with interest 
thereon. 
(iii) 
An Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entity will not be allocated any 
Unsecured Non-Municipal Transmission Default Amounts under this Section 
3.4(g) for any Transmission Default Period if, at the start of the calendar year in 
which the applicable Transmission Default Period occurred, that Unsecured Non-
Municipal Covered Entity provided the ISO with a written request to opt out of 
that allocation of Unsecured Non-Municipal Transmission Default Amounts and 
that Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entity provides the ISO with additional 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
financial assurance in the full amount of all of its “Transmission Obligations” 
under the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy all times during that 
calendar year. 
 
h) 
Reduction of Payments and Increases in Transmission Charges for Other 
Covered Entities. 
(i) 
If and to the extent that (A) the defaulting Covered Entity is not an Unsecured 
Covered Entity or the Transmission Default Amount for that Covered Entity 
exceeds the Unsecured Municipal Transmission Default Amount or the 
Unsecured Non-Municipal Transmission Default Amount (referred to together 
herein as the “Unsecured Transmission Default Amount”) for that Covered Entity 
and (B) the procedures described in clauses (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) or (g) (if 
applicable) above do not yield sufficient funds to pay all Remittance Advice 
amounts for Transmission Charges in full on the date such Payments are due, the 
ISO shall reduce Payments to those Covered Entities owed monies for 
Transmission Charges for that Transmission Default Period, pro rata based on the 
amounts owed to all Covered Entities, to the extent necessary to clear its 
accounts for Transmission Charges by the close of banking business on the date 
such Payments are due (after giving effect to clauses (f) and (g) above if 
applicable) (the amount of such reduction in Payments for Transmission Charges 
after giving effect to clauses (f) and (g) above (if applicable) is referred to herein 
as the “Uncovered Transmission Default Amount”).  For the avoidance of doubt, 
the Uncovered Transmission Default Amount is equal to the Transmission 
Default Amount minus any Unsecured Transmission Default Amount.  As funds 
attributable to an Uncovered Transmission Default Amount are received by the 
ISO (including amounts received through financial assurance provided under the 
ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy or through actions or proceedings 
commenced against the defaulting Covered Entity) prior to the next billing 
period’s Transmission Statements being distributed, such funds, together with 
any interest and late charges collected on the applicable Transmission Default 
Amount, shall be distributed pro rata to the Covered Entities that did not receive 
the full amount of their Payments as a result of such Uncovered Transmission 
Default Amount not being paid, up to the full amount that such Covered Entities 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
did not receive as a result of such Uncovered Transmission Default Amount not 
being paid, with interest thereon. 
(ii) 
To the extent that any amount of an Uncovered Transmission Default Amount 
remains unpaid to Covered Entities on the date that Transmission Statements are 
distributed to Covered Entities in the billing period immediately following the 
Transmission Default Period, the Uncovered Transmission Default Amount 
remaining unpaid shall be reallocated among all the Covered Entities receiving 
Transmission Statements for Transmission Charges for the Transmission Default 
Period (other than the Covered Entity defaulting on its payment obligations), pro 
rata based, for each Covered Entity being allocated a share of the Uncovered 
Transmission Default Amount remaining unpaid, on the sum of (i) all 
Transmission Charges due from such Covered Entity that are reflected on its 
Transmission Statement for the Transmission Default Period and (ii) all 
Payments due to such Covered Entity that are reflected on its Transmission 
Statement for the Transmission Default Period, without giving any effect to the 
process of netting Charges against Payments on each Transmission Statement 
that is the result of the ISO’s single billing system.  Thus, by way of example, a 
Covered Entity with $2,000 of Transmission Charges and no Payments on its 
Transmission Statement for the Transmission Default Period and a Covered 
Entity with $1,000 of Transmission Charges and $1,000 of Payments on its 
Transmission Statement for the Transmission Default Period would be allocated 
an equal share of the unpaid Uncovered Transmission Default Amount under this 
clause (h)(ii).  Each Covered Entity that received a Transmission Statement for 
the Default Period shall have the amount of its Invoice or Remittance Advice in 
the billing period immediately following the Transmission Default Period 
adjusted as necessary to reflect its obligation for the Uncovered Transmission 
Default Amount remaining unpaid under this clause (h)(ii).  As funds attributable 
to an Uncovered Transmission Default Amount are received by the ISO 
(including amounts received through financial assurances provided under the ISO 
New England Financial Assurance Policy or through actions or proceedings 
commenced against the defaulting Covered Entity) after such adjusted 
Transmission Statements are distributed, such funds, together with any interest 
and late charges collected on the applicable Uncovered Transmission Default 
Amount, shall be distributed to the Covered Entities pro rata based on their 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
allocation of the Uncovered Transmission Default Amount under this clause 
(h)(ii), up to the full amount of such Uncovered Transmission Default Amount 
allocated to each such Covered Entity, with interest thereon. 
 
i) 
Order of Settlement. 
As amounts on Transmission Default Amounts are received by the ISO, the 
oldest outstanding Transmission Charges will be settled first in the order of the 
creation of such debts. 
 
Section 3.5 -Enforcement of Payment Obligations Against Defaulting Covered Entities.  Each 
Covered Entity that shared in any shortfall in payments under Section 3.3 or Section 3.4 shall 
have an independent right to seek and obtain payment and recovery of the amount of its share of 
such shortfall (the “Allocated Assessment”) from the defaulting Covered Entity.  Each Covered 
Entity consents to other Covered Entities’ having this independent right.  Any Covered Entity that 
recovers any portion of its Allocated Assessment from a defaulting Covered Entity shall promptly 
so notify the ISO, and such Covered Entity’s share of any recovery of a shortfall in payments 
hereunder shall be reduced by the amount of its Allocated Assessment that it recovers on its own.  
In addition to any amounts in default, the defaulting Covered Entity shall be liable to the ISO and 
each other Covered Entity for all reasonable costs incurred in enforcing the defaulting Covered 
Entity’s obligations. 
 
Section 3.6 – Set-Off. The ISO shall apply any amount to which any defaulting Covered Entity is 
or will be entitled for ISO Charges or Transmission Charges toward the satisfaction of any of that 
defaulting Covered Entity’s debts to NEPOOL or to the ISO for ISO Charges or Transmission 
Charges which are incurred under the Governing Documents, including the ISO New England 
Financial Assurance Policy; provided that amounts due for ISO Charges will first be applied to 
ISO Charges then, to the extent of any excess, to Transmission Charges, and amounts due for 
Transmission Charges will be first applied to Transmission Charges then, to the extent of any 
excess, to ISO Charges. 
 
Section 3.7 – Notice and Suspension.  Without limiting any of the other remedies described 
above, in the event that the ISO, in its reasonable opinion, believes that all or any part of any 
amount due to be paid by any Covered Entity for ISO Charges (other than NEPOOL GIS API 
Fees) or Transmission Charges will not be or has not been paid when due, the ISO (on its own 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
behalf or on behalf of the Covered Entities) may (but shall not be required to) notify such 
Covered Entity in writing, electronically and by first class mail sent in each case to such Covered 
Entity’s billing contact, of such payment default.  If a payment default (other than a payment 
default relating solely to NEPOOL GIS API Fees) is not cured by 10:00 a.m. Eastern Time on the 
Business Day immediately following the Business Day when such payment was originally due, 
the ISO shall notify such Market Participant, the NEPOOL Budget and Finance Subcommittee, 
all members and alternates of the Participants Committee, the New England governors and utility 
regulatory agencies and the credit and billing contacts for all Market Participants of (i) the 
identity of the Covered Entity receiving such notice, (ii) whether such notice relates to a payment 
default, (iii) whether the defaulting Covered Entity has a registered load asset, and (iv) the actions 
the ISO plans to take and/or has taken in response to such payment default.  In addition, the ISO 
will provide any additional information with respect to such payment default as may be required 
under the ISO New England Information Policy.  If a payment default (other than a payment 
default relating solely to NEPOOL GIS API Fees) is not cured by 8:30 a.m., Eastern Time, of the 
second Business Day after the date when such payment was originally due, the defaulting 
Covered Entity shall be suspended pursuant to the suspension provisions of the ISO New England 
Financial Assurance Policy (which will apply to the defaulting Covered Entity regardless of 
whether it is a “Municipal Market Participant” or a “Non-Municipal Market Participant” under 
the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy).  Such defaulting Covered Entity shall be 
suspended as described in the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy until such payment 
default has been cured in full. If the ISO has issued a notice that a Covered Entity has defaulted 
on a payment obligation and that Covered Entity subsequently cures that payment default, such 
Covered Entity may request the ISO to issue a notice stating such fact; provided, however, that 
the ISO shall not be required to issue that notice unless, in its sole discretion, the ISO determines 
that such payment default has been cured and such Covered Entity has no other outstanding 
payment defaults. 
 
If either (x) a Covered Entity is suspended from the New England Markets as a result of a 
payment default as described in this Section  3.7 as a result of a payment default involving ISO 
Charges or (y) a Covered Entity receives more than five notices of payment defaults with respect 
to ISO Charges in any rolling 12-month period, then such Covered Entity shall pay a $1,000 
penalty for such suspension and for each notice after the fifth notice in a rolling 12-month period.  
All penalties paid under this paragraph shall be deposited in the Late Payment Account. 
 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
Section 3.8– Bankruptcy Filings.  In the event any Covered Entity files a voluntary or involuntary 
petition in bankruptcy or commences a proceeding under the United States Bankruptcy Code or 
any other applicable law concerning insolvency, reorganization or bankruptcy by or against such 
Covered Entity as debtor (the “Bankruptcy Event”) and the ISO is required to return any 
payments made by such Covered Entity to the bankruptcy court having jurisdiction over such 
Bankruptcy Event, the ISO may avail itself of any emergency funding provisions in the 
Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff to collect the amounts returned by the ISO. 
 
Section 3.9 – Partial Payments of Combined Invoices.  If ISO Charges and Transmission Charges 
are included on the same Invoice and the Covered Entity pays only a portion of the Charges 
included in that Invoice, then the ISO shall use monies received by it from that Covered Entity (i) 
first to pay all amounts due from that Covered Entity to the ISO under Section IV of the 
Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff, to NEPOOL for Participant Expenses, and to the ISO 
for acting as Project Manager for the NEPOOL GIS before making any payments to any Covered 
Entities, then (ii) then to pay all amounts due for that Covered Entity’s share, if any, of the 
amounts due to the NEPOOL GIS Administrator (other than NEPOOL GIS API Fees), (iii) then 
to pay all amounts due from that Covered Entity with respect to the Shortfall Funding 
Arrangement, and (iv) then, to the extent of any remaining amounts received from that Covered 
Entity, those amounts will be allocated to the ISO Charges and Transmission Charges on that 
Invoice pro rata based on the total amount of each set of Charges on that Invoice, subject to 
Section 3.3(l) with respect to Charges for Qualification Process Cost Reimbursement Deposits 
and/or Charges for NEPOOL GIS API Fees.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a partial payment of 
any Invoice shall be a payment default. 
 
3.10 – Sharing of Financial Assurance.  If the financial assurance(s) provided by a Covered Entity 
under the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy are insufficient to effect payment of all 
ISO Charges and Transmission Charges that are due on the same date and which have not been 
paid by that Covered Entity, the ISO shall allocate the amounts available under those financial 
assurance(s) as follows: 
 
i.   
first to pay all amounts due from that Covered Entity to the ISO under Section IV 
of the Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff, to NEPOOL for Participant 
Expenses, and to the ISO for acting as Project Manager of the NEPOOL GIS; 
 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
ii. 
second, to pay all amounts due for that Covered Entity’s share, if any, of the 
amounts due to the NEPOOL GIS Administrator (other than NEPOOL GIS API 
Fees); 
 
iii. 
third, to pay all amounts due from that Covered Entity with respect to the 
Shortfall Funding Arrangement; 
 
iv. 
fourth, to the Covered Entity’s Charges for FTR transactions, up to the FTR 
Financial Assurance Requirements calculated for that Covered Entity by the ISO 
on the last day of the billing period for which the payment default has occurred; 
and 
 
v. 
fifth, to the remaining unpaid ISO Charges and the unpaid Transmission Charges 
owed by that Covered Entity pro rata based on the total amount of each set of 
Charges due, subject to Section 3.3(l) with respect to Charges for Qualification 
Process Cost Reimbursement Deposits and/or Charges for NEPOOL GIS API 
Fees. 
 
Section 3.11 – Allocation of Payment Defaults to Other Groups.  In some cases, the Default 
Amount or the Transmission Default Amount may exceed the amounts owed to the specified 
Covered Entities that are to receive less than the full Payments due to them pursuant to Section 
3.3(h)(i), Section 3.3(i)(i), Section 3.4(f)(i) or Section 3.4(g)(i).  In such an event, the ISO will 
reduce the Payments due to Covered Entities pursuant to Section 3.3(j)(i) (for ISO Charges) or 
Section 3.4(h)(i) (for Transmission Charges) to the extent necessary for the ISO to clear its 
accounts for ISO Charges or Transmission Charges by the close of banking business on the date 
the applicable Payments are due.  Any amount allocated to Covered Entities under the preceding 
sentence will be invoiced to and collected from the appropriate Covered Entities under Section 
3.3(h)(ii), Section 3.3(i)(ii), Section 3.4(f)(ii) or Section 3.4(g)(ii) in the billing period 
immediately following the billing period in which that allocation occurred.  
 
Section 3.12 – Other Rights Against Defaulting Parties. Nothing set forth in the ISO New 
England Billing Policy shall nullify, restrict or otherwise limit the rights and remedies of the ISO, 
NEPOOL and the Covered Entities against a defaulting Covered Entity that are set forth in the 
Governing Documents, including the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy or otherwise, 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
including without limitation any late payment charges or rights to terminate or limit trading rights 
of the defaulting Covered Entity, to the extent such rights and remedies otherwise exist.  
 
SECTION 4 – LATE PAYMENT CHARGE; LATE PAYMENT ACCOUNT  
 
Section 4.1 -Late Payment Charge.  
 
(a) 
If a Covered Entity is delinquent two or more times within any period of 12 
months in paying on time its ISO Charges, such Covered Entity shall pay, in 
addition to interest on each such late payment, a late payment charge for its 
second failure to pay on time, and for each subsequent failure to pay on time 
within the same 12-month period (a “Late Payment Charge”) in an amount equal 
to the greater of (i) two percent (2%) of the total amount of such late payment or 
(ii) $500.00.  In the case of a former Market Participant that applies again for 
membership in the ISO, a determination of delinquency shall be based on the 
Market Participant’s history of payment of its ISO Charges in its last 12 months 
of membership.  
 
(b) 
If a Covered Entity is delinquent two or more times within any period of 12 
months in paying on time its Transmission Charges, such Covered Entity shall 
pay, in addition to interest on each such late payment, a late payment charge for 
its second failure to pay on time, and for each subsequent failure to pay on time 
within the same 12-month period (a “Transmission Late Payment Charge”) in an 
amount equal to the greater of (i) two percent (2%) of the total amount of such 
late payment or (ii) $500.00.  In the case of a former Market Participant that 
applies again for membership in the ISO, a determination of delinquency shall be 
based on the Market Participant’s history of payment of its Transmission Charges 
in its last 12 months of membership. 
 
Section 4.2 -Late Payment Account; Transmission Late Payment Account.   
 
(a) 
Interest collected on late payments of ISO Charges shall be allocated and paid to 
the Covered Entities to whom such late payments are due, pro rata in accordance 
with the amount due to each such Covered Entity.  Late Payment Charges that 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
are collected and not distributed to the Covered Entities under the ISO New 
England Billing Policy and penalties collected under the ISO New England 
Financial Assurance Policy shall be deposited by the ISO into a segregated 
interest-bearing account (the “Late Payment Account”) for disbursement in 
accordance with Section 3.3 of the ISO New England Billing Policy; provided, 
however, that in no event shall the amount in the Late Payment Account, 
including interest accrued thereon, at any time exceed $1,000,000 or other 
amount determined from time to time by the Participants Committee (the “Late 
Payment Account Limit”).  Any amount in the Late Payment Account (including 
interest thereon) in excess of the Late Payment Account Limit shall be distributed 
to the Market Participants, no more frequently than quarterly, pro rata based on 
their ISO Charges in the month preceding the month in which such distribution is 
to be made; provided, however that no amount from the Late Payment Account 
shall be distributed to any Market Participant in payment default at the time of 
such distribution.  
 
(b) 
Interest collected on late payments of Transmission Charges shall be allocated 
and paid to the Covered Entities to whom such late payments are due, pro rata in 
accordance with the amount due to each such Covered Entity.  Transmission Late 
Payment Charges that are collected and not distributed to the Covered Entities 
under the ISO New England Billing Policy shall be deposited by the ISO into a 
segregated interest-bearing account (the “Transmission Late Payment Account”) 
for disbursement in accordance with Section 3.4 of the ISO New England Billing 
Policy; provided, however, that in no event shall the amount in the Transmission 
Late Payment Account, including interest accrued thereon, at any time exceed 
$1,000,000 or other amount determined from time to time by the Participants 
Committee (the “Transmission Late Payment Account Limit”).  Any amount in 
the Transmission Late Payment Account (including interest thereon) in excess of 
the Transmission Late Payment Account Limit shall be distributed to the Market 
Participants, no more frequently than quarterly, pro rata based on their 
Transmission Charges in the month preceding the month in which such 
distribution is to be made; provided, however that no amount from the 
Transmission Late Payment Account shall be distributed to any Market 
Participant in payment default at the time of such distribution. 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
 
SECTION 5 – SHORTFALL FUNDING ARRANGEMENTS:  PAYMENT DEFAULT 
SHORTFALL FUND  
 
Section 5.1 – Purpose and Creation of the Shortfall Funding Arrangement and the Payment 
Default Shortfall Fund. The ISO, acting in consultation with the NEPOOL Budget and Finance  
Subcommittee and NEPOOL’s Independent Financial Advisor, will arrange separate financing 
(the “Shortfall Funding Arrangement”) that can be used to make up any non-congestion related 
differences between ISO Charges received on Invoices and amounts due for ISO Charges in any 
week and as set forth in Sections 3.3 and 3.4.  The Shortfall Funding Arrangement may be 
effected through third-party financing, through the creation of a special purpose funding entity, 
through Participant-provided funds or through some other arrangement agreed upon by the ISO, 
the NEPOOL Budget and Finance Subcommittee and NEPOOL’s Independent Financial Advisor.  
If and to the extent that, at any time, the Shortfall Funding Arrangement is not available (because, 
solely for example, it has not been arranged, it does not have sufficient funds available, it has 
expired or it has been terminated prior to its maturity), the ISO shall create a Payment Default 
Shortfall Fund that will provide for such non-congestion related difference between ISO Charges 
received on Invoices and amounts due for ISO Charges in any week and for payments in 
accordance with Section 3.3 and 3.4.  The Shortfall Funding Arrangement and/or the Payment 
Default Shortfall Fund shall be in addition to and not a replacement for the Late Payment 
Account or the Transmission Late Payment Account described above.  
 
Section 5.2 -Participant Rights with respect to a Participant Financial Payment Default Shortfall 
Fund. To the extent that the Payment Default Shortfall Fund is in existence at any time, each 
Participant funding the Payment Default Shortfall Fund at such time would retain title to its share 
of amounts in the Payment Default Shortfall Fund and any interest accrued on those amounts on a 
pro rata basis based on the funds in the Payment Default Shortfall Fund provided by it.  Each 
Participant will receive a monthly report that will identify the amount of funds in the Payment 
Default Shortfall Fund that belong to that Participant and the amount of interest accrued thereon.  
As Participants withdraw from or otherwise terminate membership in the ISO, the ISO would pay 
to such Participants their share, if any, of the amounts in the Payment Default Shortfall Fund, 
with interest.  To the extent that the balance in the Payment Default Shortfall Fund exceeds the 
Required Balance, the excess will be refunded to Participants on a quarterly basis pro rata based 
on their share of the funds in the Payment Default Shortfall Fund.  
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
 
Section 5.3 – Available Amount of Shortfall Funding Arrangement; Initial Funding of the 
Payment Default Shortfall Fund. The available amount of the Shortfall Funding Arrangement, 
combined with any amount on deposit in the Payment Default Shortfall Fund, shall be equal to 
the amount of a hypothetical Invoice at the 97th percentile of the average amounts due on 
Invoices rendered to Market Participants over the six calendar months preceding the calculation 
or a lesser amount as set by the ISO from time to time in consultation with the NEPOOL Budget 
and Finance Subcommittee (the “Required Balance”), which amount shall be calculated and 
adjusted by the ISO on a quarterly basis.  To the extent that on any Business Day immediately 
following the date on which Payments for Non-Hourly Charges are due, either the Shortfall 
Funding Arrangement has not been established or the available amount of the Shortfall Funding 
Arrangement is less than the Required Balance, the ISO shall establish the Payment Default 
Shortfall Fund, and the Participants shall be responsible for initially funding the Payment Default 
Shortfall Fund in an amount equal to the Required Balance less the available amount, if any, of 
the Shortfall Funding Arrangement on such date (the “Participant Required Balance”).  The ISO, 
in consultation with NEPOOL’s Independent Financial Advisor, shall notify the Market 
Participants promptly if they believe that the available amount of the Shortfall Funding 
Arrangement is not, or is reasonably likely not to be, at least equal to the Required Balance, and 
the ISO will endeavor to arrange a supplement to any existing Shortfall Funding Arrangement at 
least to the extent required to fund such shortfall.  The Market Participant Required Balance shall 
initially be funded by the Market Participants pro rata in accordance with the methodology used 
for the shortfall allocation process in Section 3.3(j)(ii) and Section 3.4(h)(ii) of the ISO New 
England Billing Policy (but based on Charges and Payments due over the three months 
immediately preceding the establishment of the Payment Default Shortfall Fund).  A Participant’s 
Payment Default Shortfall Fund payment obligation shall be identified as a separate line item on 
its Statements and Transmission Statements. 
 
Section 5.4  Continued Shortfall Fund Funding Obligations; Payments on Shortfall Funding  
Arrangement.  
(a) 
The ISO will reallocate the Market Participants’ overall obligation with respect 
to the amounts in the Payment Default Shortfall Fund, if any, annually on each 
anniversary of the Effective Date in accordance with the methodology used for 
shortfall allocation process in Section 3.3(j)(ii) and Section 3.4(h)(ii) of the ISO 
New England Billing Policy (but based on the Charges and Payment due in the 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
preceding calendar year), with payments from and refunds to Market Participants 
that have underfunded or overfunded, respectively, the Payment Default Shortfall 
Fund based on that annual reallocation.  
 
(b) 
If the sum of the available amount of the Shortfall Funding Arrangement and the 
balance in the Payment Default Shortfall Fund (the “Total Available Amount”) 
drops below 90 percent of the Required Balance at any time because of Market 
Participant terminations (but not because of draws on the Shortfall Funding 
Arrangement or the Payment Default Shortfall Fund or adjustments to the 
Required Balance), each Market Participant would be required to contribute a 
share of the funds needed to restore the Total Available Amount to the Required 
Balance.  A Market Participant’s pro rata share of that obligation would be 
determined in accordance with the methodology used for shortfall allocation 
process in Section 3.3(j)(ii) and Section 3.4(h)(ii) of the ISO New England 
Billing Policy (but based on Charges and Payments due for the three months 
immediately preceding the date of that funding). 
 
(c) 
 If (i) the ISO draws on the Shortfall Funding Arrangement and/or the Payment 
Default Shortfall Fund and the amount drawn, together with interest and fees 
thereon, is not replaced through payments on the payment default by the date on 
which the ISO next issues an Invoice that includes Non-Hourly Charges, or (ii) 
the Required Balance is increased as a result of quarterly adjustments, that next 
Invoice for Non-Hourly Charges will include a charge for Covered Entities 
necessary to restore the Total Available Amount to the Required Balance.  That 
charge will be allocated among the Covered Entities according to the 
methodology used for the shortfall allocation process in Section 3.3(j)(ii) and 
Section 3.4(h)(ii) of the ISO New England Billing Policy with respect to the 
specific payment default.  If payments on a payment default are received after the 
amount drawn from the Shortfall Funding Arrangement and/or the Payment 
Default Shortfall Fund for that payment default has been refunded, the amount of 
the payment default so received shall be allocated and paid to the Covered 
Entities providing that funding according to the methodology of Section 3.3(j)(ii) 
and Section 3.4(h)(ii) of the ISO New England Billing Policy.  
 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
(d) 
In addition to the other obligations described in this Section 5.4, each Market 
Participant shall be charged a pro rata share of all interest, fees and other 
expenses incurred in connection with the Shortfall Funding Arrangement to the 
extent that such interest, fees and expenses are not paid by a Covered Entity with 
respect to a payment default.  The pro rata allocation of fees and expenses 
described herein shall be made on the same basis as set forth in Section 5.4(c) 
above.  A Market Participant’s obligation with respect to the Shortfall Funding 
Arrangement shall be identified as a separate line item on its statements.  
 
(e) 
Without limiting the generality of Section 3.3 and Section 3.4, to the extent that a 
Covered Entity fails to pay an Invoice, requiring a draw on the Shortfall Funding 
Arrangement, that Covered Entity shall be required to pay the amount of such 
draw, plus any interest accrued thereon and premium or other fees or expenses 
with respect thereto.  
 
Section 5.5 -Payment Default Shortfall Fund Account. Funds collected as Market Participant 
contributions to the Payment Default Shortfall Fund shall be deposited by the ISO into a 
segregated interest-bearing account.  
 
SECTION 6 -BILLING DISPUTE PROCEDURES.  
 
Section 6.1 -Requested Billing Adjustments Eligible for Resolution under Billing Dispute 
Procedures. Any Covered Entity may dispute the amount due on any fully paid monthly Invoice 
and/or any amount believed to be due or owed on a Remittance Advice (a “Disputed Amount”).  
Such party (a “Disputing Party”) shall seek to recover such Disputed Amount, including accrued 
interest, pursuant to this Section 6, by first submitting a request for billing adjustment to the ISO 
(a “Requested Billing Adjustment” or “RBA”) in accordance with the procedures provided in this 
Section 6.  A Disputing Party may seek resolution of a Requested Billing Adjustment under this 
Section 6 concerning any Disputed Amount resulting from the determination of a market clearing 
price or Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff rate by the ISO that allegedly either violates 
or is otherwise inconsistent with the Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff, or results from 
error by the ISO, and provided that a request for a correction of a Meter Data Error shall not be 
considered a Requested Billing Adjustment for purposes of the ISO New England Billing Policy, 
and requests for corrections of Meter Data Errors will be handled exclusively through the 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
procedures set out in Market Rule 1.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Requested Billing 
Adjustment must involve a requested change in an amount owed or believed to be owed in a 
Remittance Advice that is not covered by another alternative dispute resolution procedure under 
the Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff.  Furthermore, a Requested Billing Adjustment 
must not involve Disputed Amounts paid on an Invoice for Non-Hourly Charges pursuant to the 
ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy, provided, however, that this provision shall not 
preclude a Disputing Party from submitting a Requested Billing Adjustment for a Disputed 
Amount on a fully paid monthly Invoice for Non-Hourly Charges which has been paid pursuant 
to an Invoice for Non-Hourly Charges in that month.  
 
Section 6.2 -Effect of the ISO New England Billing Policy on Rights of Market Participant, PTO, 
or Non-Market Participant Transmission Customer with Respect to a Disputed Amount.  Except 
as otherwise set forth in this Section 6.2, nothing in this Section 6 shall in any way abridge the 
right of any Covered Entity to seek legal or equitable relief under the Federal Power Act and/or 
any other applicable laws with respect to any Disputed Amount.  Prior to commencing a 
proceeding before the Commission or other regulatory or judicial authority with jurisdiction to 
resolve the dispute which is the subject of the Requested Billing Adjustment, the Disputing Party 
must first submit the Requested Billing Adjustment to the ISO for review pursuant to Section 6.3 
of the ISO New England Billing Policy.  
 
Section 6.3 – ISO Review of Requested Billing Adjustment.  
 
Section 6.3.1 – Submission of Requested Billing Adjustment to the ISO; Required Contents of 
Requested Billing Adjustment. A Disputing Party shall submit a Requested Billing Adjustment in 
writing to Participant Support and Solutions at the ISO via its support system.  A Requested 
Billing Adjustment will be deemed received once an acknowledgement and/or a case number has 
been assigned and transmitted to the Disputing Party.  In its Requested Billing Adjustment, the 
Disputing Party must specify:  (a) the Disputed Amount at issue, (b) the instance of alleged error 
at issue, including a statement detailing the specific provisions of all applicable governing 
documents that support the Requested Billing Adjustment, and (c) the specific person or persons 
to whom all communications to the Disputing Party regarding the Requested Billing Adjustment 
are to be addressed.  A Disputing Party must submit its Requested Billing Adjustment within 
three months of the date that the Invoice or Remittance Advice containing the Disputed Amount 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
was issued by the ISO unless the Disputing Party could not have reasonably known of the 
existence of the alleged error within such time.   
 
Section 6.3.2 – Notice of ISO Review of Requested Billing Adjustment. Within three Business 
Days of the receipt ISO Participant Support and Solutions by of a Requested Billing Adjustment, 
the ISO shall prepare and submit to all Covered Entities and to the Chair of the NEPOOL Budget 
and Finance Subcommittee a notice of the Requested Billing Adjustment (“Notice of RBA”), 
including, subject to the protection of Confidential Information, the specifics of the Requested 
Billing Adjustment.  The Notice of RBA shall identify a specific representative of the ISO to 
whom all communications regarding the Requested Billing Adjustment are to be sent.  
 
Section 6.3.3 – ISO Review of Requested Billing Adjustments. The ISO shall complete its review 
of a Requested Billing Adjustment received pursuant to Section 6.3 within twenty (20) Business 
Days of the date the ISO distributes the Notice of RBA.  To the extent that either party makes 
such a request and both parties agree to such request, the ISO and Disputing Party may meet or 
otherwise confer during this period in an effort to resolve the Requested Billing Adjustment.   
 
Section 6.3.4 – Comment Period. Any Covered Entity which desires to do so, or NEPOOL if it 
desires to do so, may submit to the ISO’s designated representative, on or before the tenth (10th) 
Business Day following the date the ISO distributes the Notice of RBA, written comments to the 
ISO with respect to the Requested Billing Adjustment.  Any such comments are to be transmitted 
simultaneously to the Disputing Party.  The Disputing Party may respond to any such comments 
by submitting a written response to the ISO’s designated representative and to the commenting 
party on or before the fifteenth (15th) Business Day following the date the ISO distributes the 
Notice of RBA.  In determining the action it will take with respect to the Requested Billing 
Adjustment, the ISO shall consider the written response filed by the Disputing Party.  The ISO 
may but is not required to consider any written comments that are filed by any other interested 
party.  
 
Section 6.3.5 – ISO Action on Requested Billing Adjustment. The ISO shall provide to the 
Disputing Party and to the Chair of the NEPOOL Budget and Finance Subcommittee a written 
decision (the “RBA Decision”) accepting or denying a Requested Billing Adjustment received 
pursuant to this Section 6.3 within twenty (20) Business Days of the date the ISO distributes the 
Notice of RBA, unless some later date is agreed upon by the Disputing Party and the ISO.  The 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
ISO shall provide written notice and a copy of each RBA Decision to each Covered Entity either 
eligible for reimbursement, denied reimbursement of a Disputed Amount or required to provide 
reimbursement of a Disputed Amount because of an RBA Decision (hereafter referred to as an 
“Affected Party” or the “Affected Parties”) within five (5) Business Days of the date the RBA 
Decision is rendered.  In providing such notice to any Affected Party required to provide 
reimbursement of a Disputed Amount, the ISO shall specify the amount to be reimbursed by such 
Affected Party and the calculations supporting the determination of such reimbursement amount.  
Subsequent to the provision of the written notice of the RBA Decision as set forth above, the ISO 
shall provide each Affected Party with respect to that RBA Decision a monthly report of the 
status of such RBA Decision within the dispute resolution process set forth in this Section 6, 
including a statement of the accounting treatment of the disputed amount owed by or to that 
Affected Party with respect to that RBA Decision in accordance with the most recent decision 
issued pursuant to Sections 6.3.6 or 6.4 of the ISO New England Billing Policy, whichever 
applies, with respect to that RBA Decision.  For purposes of this Section, the term “Affected 
Parties” shall also include the Disputing Party.  
 
Section 6.3.6 – Finality of ISO Action on Requested Billing Adjustment. Except as otherwise 
provided in this Section 6.3.6, the RBA Decision shall become final and binding on the Affected 
Parties and shall not be appealable in any forum on the twenty-first (21st) Business Day after the 
notice of the specific RBA Decision at issue was provided to the Affected Parties as set forth in 
Section 6.3.5 above.  The RBA Decision shall not become final or binding if, on or before the 
twentieth (20th) Business Day after the notice of the specific RBA Decision at issue was provided 
to the Affected Parties as set forth in Section 6.3.5 above, an Affected Party has appealed the 
RBA Decision by commencing a proceeding before the Commission or other regulatory or 
judicial authority with jurisdiction over the dispute, or has filed an appeal pursuant to Section 6.4 
of the ISO New England Billing Policy.  If a proceeding is commenced before the Commission or 
other regulatory or judicial authority with jurisdiction over the dispute, the Affected Party 
commencing that proceeding shall simultaneously transmit a copy of its initial pleading in that 
proceeding to the ISO’s designated representative for that particular RBA Decision, and to the 
Chair of the NEPOOL Budget and Finance Subcommittee and shall also submit to the ISO’s 
designated representative for that particular RBA a copy of the final order or decision in that 
proceeding resolving the dispute. If any such appeal is filed pursuant to Section 6.4 of the ISO 
New England Billing Policy, the RBA Decision shall have no force or effect unless or until it is 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
affirmed or upheld upon completion of the appeal process selected by the Affected Party and as 
provided for in the ISO New England Billing Policy.  
 
Section 6.4 – Right of Affected Party to Review of ISO RBA Decision by AAA.  
 
Section 6.4.1 – Right to Further Review. An Affected Party may seek review of an RBA Decision 
by an independent third party neutral by submitting, on or before the twentieth (20th) Business 
Day after the notice of the specific RBA Decision at issue was provided to the Affected Parties as 
set forth in Section 6.3.5 above, a request for arbitration of the Requested Billing Adjustment 
with the American Arbitration Association (“AAA”).  At the same time that it submits its request 
to the AAA, the Affected Party commencing any such review of an RBA Decision shall transmit 
its request for arbitration: (i) to the ISO’s designated representative for that particular RBA 
Decision; and (ii) to each of the Affected Parties; and (iii) to the Chair of the NEPOOL Budget 
and Finance Subcommittee.  The ISO and any Affected Party shall be joined as parties to the 
arbitration.  NEPOOL and other Covered Entities shall be permitted to intervene in the arbitration 
if they desire to do so.  
 
Section 6.4.2 – Finality of the AAA Neutral’s Decision. Except as otherwise provided in this 
Section 6.4.2, the written, final decision of the AAA neutral shall become final and binding on the 
Affected Parties, including the ISO, and shall not be appealable in any forum on the twenty-first 
(21st) Business Day after the date on which the final decision of the AAA neutral was issued.  
The final decision of the AAA neutral shall not become final or binding if on or before the 
twentieth (20th) Business Day after the date on which the final decision of the AAA neutral was 
issued, an Affected Party or Parties or the ISO has appealed the final decision of the AAA neutral 
by commencing a proceeding before the Commission or other regulatory or judicial authority 
with jurisdiction over the dispute.  If any such appeal is filed, the final decision of the AAA 
neutral shall have no force or effect unless or until it is affirmed or upheld upon completion of the 
appeal process.  
 
Section 6.5 – Access to Confidential Information. Information that is deemed confidential 
pursuant to the ISO New England Information Policy in the possession, custody or control of the 
ISO concerning the dollar amount in Invoices or Remittance Advices issued by the ISO 
(“Confidential Information”) shall be made available under these billing dispute procedures only 
to “Dispute Representatives” who have executed a confidentiality agreement in accordance both 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
with this Section 6.5 and the ISO New England Information Policy in the form of Attachment 1 
hereto (“Confidentiality Agreement”).  A copy of the executed Confidentiality Agreement for a 
Dispute Representative shall be provided to the ISO prior to the disclosure of any Confidential 
Information to said Dispute Representative.  Confidential Information shall not be disclosed to 
anyone other than in accordance with this Section 6.5, and shall be used only in connection with 
the billing dispute procedures provided under this Section 6.  
 
a) 
Potential Disputing Parties’ Right of Access to Confidential Information. A 
Market Participant, PTO or Non-Market Participant Transmission Customer that 
is a potential Disputing Party is entitled to obtain access to Confidential 
Information for its Dispute Representative, if and only if, it can demonstrate to 
the ISO that such access is required to determine if it has a substantive basis for 
filing a Requested Billing Adjustment with the ISO.  Such demonstration by a 
potential Disputing Party, at a minimum, shall include: the information submitted 
to ISO Participant Support and Solutions required in Section 6.3.1; and, why lack 
of access to Confidential Information prevents the potential Disputing Party from 
determining if it has a substantive basis for filing such a Requested Billing 
Adjustment.  A potential Disputing Party shall submit a request for access to 
Confidential Information in writing to the ISO (an “Information Request”). The 
ISO shall evaluate and respond to such an Information Request within ten (10) 
days of the receipt of the Information Request, and where the need for access to 
Confidential Information is demonstrated in accordance with the above, shall 
provide access to such Confidential Information within fifteen (15) days of the 
receipt of the Information Request.  
 
b) 
Affected Parties Right of Access to Confidential Information. If the RBA 
Decision is submitted to the AAA for resolution pursuant to Section 6.4, then for 
purposes of that AAA proceeding a Market Participant or Non-Market 
Participant Transmission Customer that is an Affected Party is entitled to obtain 
access to Confidential Information for its Dispute Representative if, and only if, 
it can demonstrate to the AAA Neutral that such access is required to protect its 
financial interests with respect to review of an RBA Decision pending before the 
Neutral.  An Affected Party shall submit a request for access to Confidential 
Information concerning an RBA Decision within the timeframes established by 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
the Neutral.  The Neutral shall have the authority to enter such orders as may be 
necessary to protect the Confidential Information, in accordance with applicable 
ISO policies including but not limited to the ISO New England Information 
Policy.  
 
c) 
Dispute Representatives.  Dispute Representatives shall be limited to the AAA 
Neutral(s), Covered Entities and third parties retained by and/or in-house legal 
counsel of the AAA or Covered Entities; provided, however, that Confidential 
Information may not be disclosed to a Dispute Representative to the extent the 
disclosure is prohibited by Order 889.  A Dispute Representative may disclose 
Confidential Information to any other Dispute Representative as long as the 
disclosing Dispute Representative and the receiving Dispute Representative each 
have executed a Confidentiality Agreement.  In the event that any Dispute 
Representative to whom Confidential Information is disclosed ceases to be 
engaged in a matter under these billing dispute procedures, or is no longer 
qualified to be a Dispute Representative under this Section, access to 
Confidential Information by that person, or persons, shall be terminated and all 
such Confidential Information received by that party shall be returned to the ISO 
or destroyed to the satisfaction of the ISO.  Even if no longer engaged as a 
Dispute Representative under this Section, every person who has executed a 
Confidentiality Agreement shall continue to be bound by the provisions of this 
Section and such Confidentiality Agreement.  All Dispute Representatives are 
responsible for ensuring that persons under their supervision or control comply 
with this Section and the Confidentiality Agreement.  
 
d) 
Maintenance of Confidential Information.  All copies of all documents and 
materials containing Confidential Information shall be maintained by Dispute 
Representatives at all times in a secure place in sealed envelopes or other 
appropriate containers endorsed to the effect that they are sealed pursuant to this 
Section.  Such documents and material shall be marked PROTECTED 
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION and shall be maintained under seal and 
provided only to Dispute Representatives as are authorized to examine and 
inspect such Confidential Informational.  Dispute Representatives shall provide 
to the ISO a list of those persons under the supervision and/or control of the 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
Dispute Representative who are entitled to receive Confidential Information.  
Dispute Representatives shall take all reasonable precautions to ensure that 
Confidential Information is not distributed to unauthorized persons.  
 
e) 
ISO Right to Object to Access to Confidential Information. Nothing in this 
Section shall be construed as precluding the ISO from objecting to providing any 
party access to Confidential Information on any legal grounds other than those 
provided under the ISO New England Information Policy, as it may be amended 
time to time.  
 
SECTION 7 -WEEKLY BILLING PRINCIPLES FOR NON-HOURLY CHARGES.  
 
The ISO shall administer weekly billing arrangements for Non-Hourly Charges and Transmission 
Charges that have been effected in special circumstances pursuant to the ISO New England 
Financial Assurance Policy according to the following principles:  
 
Section 7.1 - Weekly Invoices. The ISO shall issue weekly Invoices for such Non-Hourly 
Charges and such Transmission Charges to any Market Participant or Non-Market Participant 
Transmission Customer for which such a weekly billing arrangement has been established to the 
extent such Market Participant’s or Non-Market Participant Transmission Customer’s Non-
Hourly Charges and Transmission Charges exceed the Payments due to it for Non-Hourly 
Charges and Transmission Charges, respectively, for the current billing week.  Such weekly 
Invoices for Non-Hourly Charges and for Transmission Charges would be issued and due at the 
same times as one of the twice weekly Invoices for Hourly Charges as determined by the ISO.  
Remittance Advices for Non-Hourly Charges and for Transmission Charges for such Market 
Participants and Non-Market Participant Transmission Customers will still be issued monthly, in 
accordance with the procedures set forth above.  
 
Section 7.2 -Basis for Billing. The amounts due from such Market Participant or Non-Market 
Participant Transmission Customer on weekly Invoices for Non-Hourly Charges and 
Transmission Charges shall be based on estimates derived by pro-rating the most recent final 
monthly Statements and Transmission Statements issued for such Market Participant or Non-
Market Participant Transmission Customer.  
 
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
Section 7.3 -Monthly Reconciliation. In connection with each monthly billing cycle, the ISO shall 
reconcile the sum of the weekly Invoices for Non-Hourly Charges and for Transmission Charges 
issued with the normal monthly billing quantities for such Non-Hourly Charges and Transmission 
Charges calculated for the Market Participant or Non-Market Participant Transmission Customer.  
The ISO shall perform a true-up of any amounts owed or due on the following weekly Statements 
or monthly Transmission Statements.  
 
Section 7.4 – FTR-Only Customers. FTR-Only Customers are not eligible for weekly billing 
arrangements for Non-Hourly Charges.  
Effective Date: 2/20/2023 - Docket # ER23-705-000 
 
 
 
 
Re:  Requested Billing Adjustment _________________ 
 
CONFIDENTIALITY AND NONDISCLOSURE AGREEMENT 
 
The ISO (“Provider”) agrees to make available, pursuant to Section 6 of the ISO New England Billing Policy, to 
________________________ (“Recipient”) confidential and proprietary information (Confidential Information”) relevant to 
resolution of the Requested Billing Adjustment ______ and any appeals thereof as provided for in said Section 6. 
 
1. 
Any information provided to the Recipient and labeled “Confidential Information” by Provider shall be 
confidential subject to this Agreement. 
2. 
The Confidential Information is received by Recipient in confidence. 
3. 
The Confidential Information shall not be used or disclosed by the Recipient except in accordance with the 
terms contained herein, with Section 5 of the ISO New England Billing Policy and with the ISO New 
England Information Policy. 
4. 
Only individuals who are Dispute Representatives as that term is defined in Section 6 of the ISO New 
England Billing Policy, and not entities, may be Recipients of Confidential Information under this paragraph.  
By executing this Agreement, each Recipient certified that he/she meets the requirements of this Agreement. 
5. 
The following conditions apply to each Recipient: 
a. 
Each Recipient will receive one (1) numbered, controlled copy of the Confidential Information.  
The Recipient will not make any copies thereof or provide the Confidential Information to any 
individual or entity except one who has executed and delivered an Agreement identical to this 
Agreement to the Provider. 
b. 
The Recipient shall maintain a log of all persons granted access to the Confidential Information. 
c. 
The Recipient, by signing this Agreement acknowledges that he/she may not in any manner 
disclose the Confidential Information to any person, and that he/she may not use the Confidential 
Information for the benefit of any person except in this proceeding and in accordance with the  
terms of this Agreement, Section 6 of the ISO New England Billing Policy and the ISO New 
England Information Policy. 
d. 
The Recipient acknowledges that any violation of this Agreement may subject the Recipient to civil 
actions for violation thereof. 
e. 
Within thirty (30) days of the final decision issued with respect to the Requested Billing 
Adjustment terminating all appeals with respect to this Requested Billing Adjustment, Recipient 
shall return the Confidential Information to Provider. 
 
PROVIDER: 
 
 
 
 
RECIPIENT: 
By: _________________________ 
 
 
By:__________________________ 
Dated:_______________________ 
 
 
Dated:________________________ 
