Table of Contents 
 
I.1 Purpose and Components of this Tariff; ISO Objectives  
I.1.1 Purpose of this Tariff.  
I.1.2 Components of this Tariff  
I.1.3 ISO Objectives  
I.2 Rules of Construction; Definitions 
I.2.1 Rules of Construction  
I.2.2 Definitions  
I.3 Obligations of Market Participants and Other Customers  
I.3.1 Service Agreement  
I.3.2 Assets  
I.3.3 Maintenance and Repair  
I.3.4 Central Dispatch  
I.3.5 Provision of Information  
I.3.6 Records and Information  
I.3.7 Payment of Invoices; Compliance with Policies  
I.3.8 Protective Devices for Transmission Facilities  
I.3.9 Review of Market Participant’s Proposed Plans  
I.3.10 Market Participant to Avoid Adverse Effect 
I.4 Termination Of Status As A Customer  
I.5 Force Majeure, Liability and Indemnification  
I.5.1 Force Majeure  
I.5.2 Liability  
I.5.3 Indemnification  
I.6 Dispute Resolution  
I.7 Creditworthiness  
I.8 Rights Under The Federal Power Act 
I.9 Pre-Existing Contracts  
Exhibit IA – ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy 
Exhibit IB – [Reserved.]  
Exhibit IC – [Reserved.]  
Exhibit ID – ISO New England Billing Policy  
 
 
I.1  
Purpose and Components of this Tariff; ISO Objectives  
 
I.1.1.    Purpose of this Tariff:  
This Tariff provides the rates, terms and conditions for transmission, market and other services provided 
by the ISO within the New England Control Area.  
 
I.1.2.    Components of this Tariff:  
This Tariff includes the following components:  
 
(a)  
these general terms and conditions (Section I) and the ISO New England Financial Assurance 
Policy (Exhibit IA) and the ISO New England Billing Policy (Exhibit ID);  
(b)  
the ISO Open Access Transmission Tariff (the “OATT”) (Section II);  
(c)  
the ISO Market Rule 1 (Section III);  
(d)  
provisions for the recovery of the ISO’s administrative expenses and the ISO's capital funding 
arrangements (Section IV); and  
(e)  
other attachments, including a pro forma Market Participant Service Agreement (Attachment A)  
 
I.1.3.  Mission of ISO:  
The mission of ISO is (through means including, but not limited to, planning, central dispatching, 
coordinated maintenance of electric supply and demand-side resources and transmission facilities, 
obtaining emergency power for Market Participants from other Control Areas, system restoration (where 
required), the development of market rules, the provision of an open access regional transmission tariff 
and the provision of a means for effective coordination with other control areas and utilities situated in the 
United States and Canada):  
 
(a)  
to assure the bulk power supply of the New England Control Area conforms to proper standards 
of reliability;  
(b)  
to create and sustain open, non-discriminatory, competitive, unbundled markets for energy, 
capacity, and ancillary services (including Operating Reserves) that are (i) economically efficient 
and balanced between buyers and sellers, and (ii) provide an opportunity for a participant to 
receive compensation through the market for a service it provides in a manner consistent with 
proper standards of reliability and the long-term sustainability of competitive markets;  
(c)  
to provide market rules that (i) promote a market based on voluntary participation, (ii) allow 
market participants to manage the risks involved in offering and purchasing services, and (iii) 
 
 
compensate at fair value (considering both benefits and risks) any required service, subject to 
Commission’s jurisdiction and review;  
(d)  
to allow informed participation and encourage ongoing market improvements;  
(e)  
to provide transparency with respect to the operation of and the pricing in markets and purchase 
programs;  
(f) 
 to provide access to competitive markets within the New England Control Area and to 
neighboring regions; and  
(g)  
to provide for an equitable allocation of costs, benefits and responsibilities among market 
participants.  
 
In fulfilling this mission and consistent with the preceding principles, the ISO shall strive to perform all 
its functions and services in a cost-effective manner, for the benefit of all those served by the ISO.  To 
assist stakeholders in evaluating any major ISO initiative that affects market design, system planning or 
operation of the New England bulk power system, the ISO will provide quantitative and qualitative 
information on the need for and the impacts, including costs, of the initiative. 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
I.2  
Rules of Construction; Definitions 
 
I.2.1.  Rules of Construction:  
In this Tariff, unless otherwise provided herein:  
 
(a)  
words denoting the singular include the plural and vice versa;  
(b)  
words denoting a gender include all genders;  
(c)  
references to a particular part, clause, section, paragraph, article, exhibit, schedule, appendix or 
other attachment shall be a reference to a part, clause, section, paragraph, or article of, or an 
exhibit, schedule, appendix or other attachment to, this Tariff;  
(d)  
the exhibits, schedules and appendices attached hereto are incorporated herein by reference and 
shall be construed with an as an integral part of this Tariff to the same extent as if they were set 
forth verbatim herein;  
(e)  
a reference to any statute, regulation, proclamation, ordinance or law includes all statutes, 
regulations, proclamations, amendments, ordinances or laws varying, consolidating or replacing 
the same from time to time, and a reference to a statute includes all regulations, policies, 
protocols, codes, proclamations and ordinances issued or otherwise applicable under that statute 
unless, in any such case, otherwise expressly provided in any such statute or in this Tariff;  
(f) 
 a reference to a particular section, paragraph or other part of a particular statute shall be deemed 
to be a reference to any other section, paragraph or other part substituted therefor from time to 
time;  
(g)  
a definition of or reference to any document, instrument or agreement includes any amendment or 
supplement to, or restatement, replacement, modification or novation of, any such document, 
instrument or agreement unless otherwise specified in such definition or in the context in which 
such reference is used;  
(h)  
a reference to any person (as hereinafter defined) includes such person’s successors and permitted 
assigns in that designated capacity;  
(i)  
any reference to “days” shall mean calendar days unless “Business Days” (as hereinafter defined) 
are expressly specified;  
(j) 
 if the date as of which any right, option or election is exercisable, or the date upon which any 
amount is due and payable, is stated to be on a date or day that is not a Business Day, such right, 
option or election may be exercised, and such amount shall be deemed due and payable, on the 
next succeeding Business Day with the same effect as if the same was exercised or made on such 
date or day (without, in the case of any such payment, the payment or accrual of any interest or 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
other late payment or charge, provided such payment is made on such next succeeding Business 
Day);  
(k)  
words such as “hereunder,” “hereto,” “hereof” and “herein” and other words of similar import 
shall, unless the context requires otherwise, refer to this Tariff as a whole and not to any 
particular article, section, subsection, paragraph or clause hereof; and a reference to “include” or 
“including” means including without limiting the generality of any description preceding such 
term, and for purposes hereof the rule of ejusdem generis shall not be applicable to limit a general 
statement, followed by or referable to an enumeration of specific matters, to matters similar to 
those specifically mentioned.  
 
I.2.2.  Definitions:   
In this Tariff, the terms listed in this section shall be defined as described below:  
 
Active Demand Capacity Resource is one or more Demand Response Resources located within the 
same Dispatch Zone, that is registered with the ISO, assigned a unique resource identification number by 
the ISO, and participates in the Forward Capacity Market to fulfill a Market Participant’s Capacity Supply 
Obligation pursuant to Section III.13 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Actual Capacity Provided is the measure of capacity provided during a Capacity Scarcity Condition, as 
described in Section III.13.7.2.2 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Actual Load is the consumption at the Retail Delivery Point for the hour. 
 
Additional Resource Blackstart O&M Payment is defined and calculated as specified in Section 5.1.2 
of Schedule 16 to the OATT. 
 
Additional Resource Specified-Term Blackstart Capital Payment is defined and calculated as 
specified in Section 5.1.2 of Schedule 16 to the OATT. 
 
Additional Resource Standard Blackstart Capital Payment is defined and calculated as specified in 
Section 5.1.2 of Schedule 16 to the OATT. 
 
Administrative Costs are those costs incurred in connection with the review of Applications for 
transmission service and the carrying out of System Impact Studies and Facilities Studies.  
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Administrative Export De-List Bid is a bid that may be submitted in a Forward Capacity Auction by 
certain Existing Generating Capacity Resources subject to a multi-year contract to sell capacity outside of 
the New England Control Area during the associated Capacity Commitment Period, as described in 
Section III.13.1.2.3.1.4 of Market Rule 1.  
 
ADR Neutrals are one or more firms or individuals identified by the ISO with the advice and consent of 
the Participants Committee that are prepared to act as neutrals in ADR proceedings under Appendix D to 
Market Rule 1.  
 
Advance is defined in Section IV.A.3.2 of the Tariff. 
 
Affected Party, for purposes of the ISO New England Billing Policy, is defined in Section 6.3.5 of the 
ISO New England Billing Policy. 
  
Affiliate is any person or entity that controls, is controlled by, or is under common control by another 
person or entity.  For purposes of this definition, "control" means the possession, directly or indirectly, of 
the authority to direct the management or policies of an entity. A voting interest of ten percent or more 
shall create a rebuttable presumption of control.  
 
AGC is automatic generation control. 
 
AGC SetPoint is the desired output signal for a Resource providing Regulation that is produced by the 
AGC system as frequently as every four seconds. 
 
AGC SetPoint Deadband is a deadband expressed in megawatts that is applied to changing values of the 
AGC SetPoint for generating units. 
 
Allocated Assessment is a Covered Entity’s right to seek and obtain payment and recovery of its share in 
any shortfall payments under Section 3.3 or Section 3.4 of the ISO New England Billing Policy. 
 
Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) is the procedure set forth in Appendix D to Market Rule 1. 
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Alternative Technology Regulation Resource (ATRR) is one or more facilities capable of providing 
Regulation that have been registered in accordance with the Asset Registration Process. An Alternative 
Technology Regulation Resource is eligible to participate in the Regulation Market. 
 
Ancillary Services are those services that are necessary to support the transmission of electric capacity 
and energy from resources to loads while maintaining reliable operation of the New England 
Transmission System in accordance with Good Utility Practice.  
 
Announced Schedule 1 EA Amount, Announced Schedule 2 EA Amount, Announced Schedule 3 
EA Amount are defined in Section IV.B.2.2 of the Tariff.  
 
Annual Transmission Revenue Requirements are the annual revenue requirements of a PTO’s PTF or 
of all PTOs’ PTF for purposes of the OATT shall be the amount determined in accordance with 
Attachment F to the OATT.  
 
Annual Reconfiguration Transaction is a bilateral transaction that may be used in accordance with 
Section  III.13.5.4 of Market Rule 1 to specify a price when a Capacity Supply Obligation is transferred 
using supply offers and demand bids in Annual Reconfiguration Auctions. 
 
Applicants, for the purposes of the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy, are entities applying 
for Market Participant status or for transmission service from the ISO. 
 
Application is a written request by an Eligible Customer for transmission service pursuant to the 
provisions of the OATT.  
 
Asset is a Generator Asset, a Demand Response Asset, a component of an On-Peak Demand Resource or 
Seasonal Peak Demand Resource, a Distributed Energy Resource participating as part of Demand 
Response Distributed Energy Resource Aggregation, a Settlement Only Distributed Energy Resource 
Aggregation, a Load Asset (including an Asset Related Demand), an Alternative Technology Regulation 
Resource, or a Tie-Line Asset.  
 
Asset Registration Process is the ISO business process for registering an Asset.  
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Asset Related Demand is a Load Asset that has been discretely modeled within the ISO’s dispatch and 
settlement systems, settles at a Node, has been registered in accordance with the Asset Registration 
Process, and is made up of either: (1) one or more individual end-use metered customers receiving service 
from the same point or points of electrical supply with an aggregate average hourly load of 1 MW or 
greater during the 12 months preceding its registration; (2) a Storage DARD with a consumption 
capability of at least 0.1 MW; or (3) one or more storage facilities that are not Electric Storage Facilities 
with an aggregate consumption capability of at least 1 MW.  
 
Asset Related Demand Bid Block-Hours are Block-Hours assigned to the Lead Market Participant for 
each Asset Related Demand bid.  Blocks of the bid in effect for each hour will be totaled to determine the 
daily quantity of Asset Related Demand Bid Block-Hours.  In the case that a Resource has a Real-Time 
unit status of “unavailable” for an entire day, that day will not contribute to the quantity of Asset Related 
Demand Bid Block-Hours.  However, if the Resource has at least one hour of the day with a unit status of 
“available,” the entire day will contribute to the quantity of Asset Related Demand Bid Block-Hours.  
 
Asset-Specific Going Forward Costs are the net costs of an asset that is part of an Existing Generating 
Capacity Resource, calculated for the asset in the same manner as the net costs of Existing Generating 
Capacity Resources as described in Section III.13.1.2.3.2.1.1.1 (for an asset with a Static De-List Bid or 
an Export Bid) or Section III.13.1.2.3.2.1.1.2 (for an asset with a Permanent De-List Bid or Retirement 
De-List Bid).  
 
Assigned Meter Reader reports to the ISO the hourly and monthly MWh associated with the Asset. 
These MWh are used for settlement.  The Assigned Meter Reader may designate an agent to help fulfill 
its Assigned Meter Reader responsibilities; however, the Assigned Meter Reader remains functionally 
responsible to the ISO.  
 
Auction Revenue Right (ARR) is a right to receive FTR Auction Revenues in accordance with 
Appendix C of Market Rule 1.  
 
Auction Revenue Right Allocation (ARR Allocation) is defined in Section 1 of Appendix C of Market 
Rule 1.  
 
Auction Revenue Right Holder (ARR Holder) is an entity which is the record holder of an Auction 
Revenue Right (excluding an Incremental ARR) in the register maintained by the ISO.  
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Authorized Commission is defined in Section 3.3 of the ISO New England Information Policy. 
 
Authorized Person is defined in Section 3.3 of the ISO New England Information Policy. 
 
Automatic Response Rate is the response rate, in MW/Minute, at which a Market Participant is willing 
to have a Regulation Resource change its output or consumption while providing Regulation between the 
Regulation High Limit and Regulation Low Limit.  
 
Available Energy is a value that reflects the MWhs of energy available from an Electric Storage Facility 
for economic dispatch.  
 
Available Storage is a value that reflects the MWhs of unused storage available from an Electric Storage 
Facility for economic dispatch of consumption. 
 
Average Hourly Load Reduction is either:  (i) the sum of the On-Peak Demand Resource’s electrical 
energy reduction during Demand Resource On-Peak Hours in the month divided by the number of 
Demand Resource On-Peak Hours in the month; or (ii) the sum of the Seasonal Peak Demand Resource’s 
electrical energy reduction during Demand Resource Seasonal Peak Hours in the month divided by the 
number of Demand Resource Seasonal Peak Hours in the month. The On-Peak Demand Resource’s or 
Seasonal Peak Demand Resource’s electrical energy reduction and Average Hourly Load Reduction shall 
be determined consistent with the resource’s Measurement and Verification Plan, which shall be reviewed 
by the ISO to ensure consistency with the measurement and verification requirements, as described in 
Section III.13.1.4.3 of Market Rule 1 and the ISO New England Manuals.  
 
Average Hourly Output is either: (i) the sum of the On-Peak Demand Resource’s electrical energy 
output during Demand Resource On-Peak Hours in the month divided by the number of Demand 
Resource On-Peak Hours in the month; or (ii) the sum of the Seasonal Peak Demand Resource’s electrical 
energy output during Demand Resource Seasonal Peak Hours in the month divided by the number of 
Demand Resource Seasonal Peak Hours in the month.  Electrical energy output and Average Hourly 
Output shall be determined consistent with the resource’s Measurement and Verification Plan, which shall 
be reviewed by the ISO to ensure consistency with the measurement and verification requirements, as 
described in Section III.13.1.4.3 of Market Rule 1 and the ISO New England Manuals.  
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Backstop Transmission Solution is a solution proposed:  (i) to address a reliability or market efficiency 
need identified by the ISO in a Needs Assessment reported by the ISO pursuant to Section 4.1(i) of 
Attachment K to the ISO OATT, (ii) by the PTO or PTOs with an obligation under Schedule 3.09(a) of 
the TOA to address the identified need; and (iii) in circumstances in which the competitive solution 
process specified in Section 4.3 of Attachment K to the ISO OATT will be utilized.     
 
Bankruptcy Code is the United States Bankruptcy Code. 
 
Bankruptcy Event occurs when a Covered Entity files a voluntary or involuntary petition in bankruptcy 
or commences a proceeding under the United States Bankruptcy Code or any other applicable law 
concerning insolvency, reorganization or bankruptcy by or against such Covered Entity as debtor. 
 
Benchmark Scenario is an Economic Study reference scenario that is described in Section 17.2(a) of 
Attachment K to the OATT. 
 
Bilateral Contract (BC) is any of the following types of contracts: Internal Bilateral for Load, Internal 
Bilateral for Market for Energy, and External Transactions.  
 
Bilateral Contract Block-Hours are Block-Hours assigned to the seller and purchaser of an Internal 
Bilateral for Load, Internal Bilateral for Market for Energy and External Transactions; provided, however, 
that only those contracts which apply to the Real-Time Energy Market will accrue Block-Hours.  
 
Binary Storage DARD is a DARD that participates in the New England Markets as part of a Binary 
Storage Facility, as described in Section III.1.10.6 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Binary Storage Facility is a type of Electric Storage Facility, as described in Section III.1.10.6 of Market 
Rule 1. 
 
Blackstart Capability Test is the test, required by ISO New England Operating Documents, of a 
resource’s capability to provide Blackstart Service. 
 
Blackstart Capital Payment is the annual compensation, as calculated pursuant to Section 5.1, or as 
referred to in Section 5.2, of Schedule 16 to the OATT, for a Designated Blackstart Resource’s Blackstart 
Equipment capital costs associated with the provision of Blackstart Service (excluding the capital costs 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
associated with compliance with NERC Critical Infrastructure Protection Reliability Standards as part of 
Blackstart Service). 
 
Blackstart Equipment is any equipment that is solely necessary to enable the Designated Blackstart 
Resource to provide Blackstart Service and is not required to provide other products or services under the 
Tariff. 
 
Blackstart O&M Payment is the annual Blackstart O&M compensation calculated under either Section 
5.1 or 5.2 of Schedule 16 of the OATT, as applicable. 
 
Blackstart Owner is the Market Participant who is authorized on behalf of the Generator Owner(s) to 
offer or operate the resource as a Designated Blackstart Resource and is authorized to commit the 
resource to provide Blackstart Service. 
 
Blackstart Service is the Ancillary Service described in Section II.47 of the Tariff and Schedule 16 of the 
OATT. 
 
Blackstart Service Commitment is the commitment by a Blackstart Owner for its resource to provide 
Blackstart Service and the acceptance of that commitment by the ISO, in the manner detailed in ISO New 
England Operating Procedure No. 11 – Designated Blackstart Resource Administration (OP 11), and 
which includes a commitment to provide Blackstart Service established under Operating Procedure 11 – 
Designated Blackstart Resource Administration (OP11).  
 
Blackstart Service Minimum Criteria are the minimum criteria that a Blackstart Owner and its resource 
must meet in order to establish and maintain a resource as a Designated Blackstart Resource. 
 
Blackstart Standard Rate Payment is the formulaic rate of monthly compensation, as calculated 
pursuant to Section 5 of Schedule 16 to the OATT, paid to a Blackstart Owner for the provision of 
Blackstart Service from a Designated Blackstart Resource. 
 
Blackstart Station is comprised of (i) a single Designated Blackstart Resource or (ii) two or more 
Designated Blackstart Resources that share Blackstart Equipment. 
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Blackstart Station-specific Rate Payment is the Commission-approved compensation, as calculated 
pursuant to Section 5.2 of Schedule 16 to the OATT, paid to a Blackstart Owner on a monthly basis for 
the provision of Blackstart Service by Designated Blackstart Resources located at a specific Blackstart 
Station. 
 
Blackstart Station-specific Rate Capital Payment is a component of the Blackstart Station-specific 
Rate Payment that reflects a Blackstart Station’s capital Blackstart Equipment costs associated with the 
provision of Blackstart Service (excluding the capital costs associated with compliance with NERC 
Critical Infrastructure Protection Reliability Standards as part of Blackstart Service). 
 
Block is defined as follows:  (1) With respect to Bilateral Contracts, a Bilateral Contract administered by 
the ISO for an hour; (2) with respect to Supply Offers administered by the ISO, a quantity with a related 
price for Energy (Supply Offers for Energy may contain multiple sets of quantity and price pairs for each 
hour); (3) with respect to Demand Bids administered by the ISO, a quantity with a related price for 
Energy (Demand Bids for Energy may contain multiple sets of quantity and price pairs for each hour); (4) 
with respect to Increment Offers administered by the ISO, a quantity with a related price for Energy 
(Increment Offers for Energy may contain multiple sets of quantity and price pairs for each hour); (5) 
with respect to Decrement Bids administered by the ISO, a quantity with a related price for Energy 
(Decrement Bids for Energy may contain multiple sets of quantity and price pairs for each hour); (6) with 
respect to Asset Related Demand bids administered by the ISO, a quantity with a related price for Energy 
(Asset Related Demand bids may contain multiple sets of quantity and price pairs for each hour); and (7) 
with respect to Demand Reduction Offers administered by the ISO, a quantity of reduced demand with a 
related price (Demand Reduction Offers may contain multiple sets of quantity and price pairs for the day).  
 
Block-Hours are the number of Blocks administered for a particular hour.  
 
Budget and Finance Subcommittee is a subcommittee of the Participants Committee, the 
responsibilities of which are specified in Section 8.4 of the Participants Agreement.  
 
Business Day is any day other than a Saturday or Sunday or ISO holidays as posted by the ISO on its 
website.  
 
Cancelled Start NCPC Credit is an NCPC Credit calculated pursuant to Appendix F to Market Rule 1. 
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Capability Demonstration Year is the one year period from September 1 through August 31. 
 
Capacity Acquiring Resource is a resource that is seeking to acquire a Capacity Supply Obligation 
through: (1) a Capacity Supply Obligation Bilateral, as described in Section III.13.5.1, or; (2) an annual or 
monthly reconfiguration auction, as described in Section III.13.4. 
 
Capacity Balancing Ratio is a ratio used in calculating the Capacity Performance Payment in the 
Forward Capacity Market, as described in Section III.13.7.2.3 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Capacity Base Payment is the portion of revenue received in the Forward Capacity Market as described 
in Section III.13.7.1 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Capacity Capability Interconnection Standard has the meaning specified in Schedule 22, Schedule 23, 
and Schedule 25 of the OATT.  
 
Capacity Clearing Price is the clearing price for a Capacity Zone for a Capacity Commitment Period 
resulting from the Forward Capacity Auction conducted for that Capacity Commitment Period, as 
determined in accordance with Section III.13.2.7 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Capacity Commitment Period is the one-year period from June 1 through May 31 for which obligations 
are assumed and payments are made in the Forward Capacity Market.  
 
Capacity Cost (CC) is one of four forms of compensation that may be paid to resources providing VAR 
Service under Schedule 2 of the OATT. 
 
Capacity Export Through Import Constrained Zone Transaction is defined in Section III.1.10.7(f)(i) 
of Market Rule 1.  
 
Capacity Load Obligation is the quantity of capacity for which a Market Participant is financially 
responsible as described in Section III.13.7.5.2 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Capacity Load Obligation Acquiring Participant is a load serving entity or any other Market 
Participant seeking to acquire a Capacity Load Obligation through a Capacity Load Obligation Bilateral, 
as described in Section III.13.5.2 of Market Rule 1. 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Capacity Network Import Capability (CNI Capability) is as defined in Section I of Schedule 25 of the 
OATT.  
 
Capacity Network Import Interconnection Service (CNI Interconnection Service) is as defined in 
Section I of Schedule 25 of the OATT. 
 
Capacity Load Obligation Bilateral is a bilateral contract through which a Market Participant may 
transfer all or a portion of its Capacity Load Obligation to another entity, as described in Section III.13.5 
of Market Rule 1.  
 
Capacity Load Obligation Transferring Participant is an entity that has a Capacity Load Obligation 
and is seeking to shed such obligation through a Capacity Load Obligation Bilateral, as described in 
Section III.13.5.2 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Capacity Network Resource (CNR) is defined in Section I of Schedule 22 and Attachment 1 to 
Schedule 23 of the OATT. 
 
Capacity Network Resource Interconnection Service (CNR Interconnection Service) is defined in 
Section I of Schedule 22 and Attachment 1 to Schedule 23 of the OATT.  
 
Capacity Performance Bilateral is a transaction for transferring Capacity Performance Score, as 
described in Section III.13.5.3 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Capacity Performance Payment is the performance-dependent portion of revenue received in the 
Forward Capacity Market, as described in Section III.13.7.2 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Capacity Performance Payment Rate is a rate used in calculating Capacity Performance Payments, as 
described in Section III.13.7.2.5 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Capacity Performance Score is a figure used in determining Capacity Performance Payments, as 
described in Section III.13.7.2.4 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Capacity Rationing Rule addresses whether offers and bids in a Forward Capacity Auction may be 
rationed, as described in Section III.13.2.6 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Capacity Scarcity Condition is a period during which performance is measured in the Forward Capacity 
Market, as described in Section III.13.7.2.1 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Capacity Supply Obligation is an obligation to provide capacity from a resource, or a portion thereof, to 
satisfy a portion of the Installed Capacity Requirement that is acquired through a Forward Capacity 
Auction in accordance with Section III.13.2, a reconfiguration auction in accordance with Section 
III.13.4, or a Capacity Supply Obligation Bilateral in accordance with Section III.13.5.1 of Market Rule 1.  
 
 
Capacity Supply Obligation Bilateral is a bilateral contract through which a Market Participant may 
transfer all or a part of its Capacity Supply Obligation to another entity, as described in Section III.13.5.1 
of Market Rule 1.  
 
Capacity Transfer Rights (CTRs) are calculated in accordance with Section III.13.7.5.4. 
 
Capacity Transferring Resource is a resource that has a Capacity Supply Obligation and is seeking to 
shed such obligation, or a portion thereof, through: (1) a Capacity Supply Obligation Bilateral, as 
described in Section III.13.5.1, or; (2) an annual or monthly reconfiguration auction, as described in 
Section III.13.4.  
 
Capacity Zone is a geographic sub-region of the New England Control Area as determined in accordance 
with Section III.12.4 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Capacity Zone Demand Curves are the demand curves used in the Forward Capacity Market for a 
Capacity Zone as specified in Sections III.13.2.2.2 and III.13.2.2.3. 
 
Capital Funding Charge (CFC) is defined in Section IV.B.2 of the Tariff.  
 
CARL Data is Control Area reliability data submitted to the ISO to permit an assessment of the ability of 
an external Control Area to provide energy to the New England Control Area in support of capacity 
offered to the New England Control Area by that external Control Area.  
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Category B Designated Blackstart Resource has the same meaning as Designated Blackstart Resource. 
 
Charge is a sum of money due from a Covered Entity to the ISO, either in its individual capacity or as 
billing and collection agent for NEPOOL pursuant to the Participants Agreement.  
 
CLAIM10 is the value, expressed in megawatts, calculated pursuant to Section III.9.5.3 of the Tariff.  
 
CLAIM30 is the value, expressed in megawatts, calculated pursuant to Section III.9.5.3 of the Tariff.  
 
Claimed Capability Audit is performed to determine the real power output capability of a Generator 
Asset, the demand reduction capability of a Demand Response Resource, or the demand reduction 
capability and energy injection capability of a Demand Response Distributed Energy Resource 
Aggregation.  
 
Cluster has the meaning specified in Section I of Schedule 22, Section 1 of 23, and Section I of 25 of the 
OATT. 
 
Cluster Enabling Transmission Upgrade (CETU) has the meaning specified in Section I of Schedule 
22, Attachment 1 to Schedule 23, and Section I of Schedule 25 of the OATT. 
 
Cluster Enabling Transmission Upgrade Regional Planning Study (CRPS) has the meaning specified 
in Section I of Schedule 22, Attachment 1 to Schedule 23, and Section I of Schedule 25 of the OATT. 
 
Cluster Entry Deadline has the meaning specified in Section I of Schedule 22, Attachment 1 to Schedule 
23, and Section I of Schedule 25 of the OATT. 
 
Cluster Interconnection System Impact Study (CSIS) has the meaning specified in Section I of 
Schedule 22, Attachment 1 to Schedule 23, and Section I of Schedule 25 of the OATT.  
 
Cluster Request Window has the meaning specified in Section I of Schedule 22, Section 1 of 23, and 
Section I of 25 of the OATT. 
 
Cluster Restudy has the meaning specified in Section I of Schedule 22, Section 1 of 23, and Section I of 
25 of the OATT. 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Cluster Study has the meaning specified in Section I of Schedule 22, Section 1 of 23, and Section I of 25 
of the OATT.  
 
CNR Capability is defined in Section I of Schedule 22 and Attachment 1 to Schedule 23 of the OATT. 
 
Coincident Peak Contribution is a Market Participant’s share of the New England Control Area 
coincident peak demand for the prior calendar year as determined prior to the start of each Capacity 
Commitment Period, which reflects the sum of the prior year’s annual coincident peak contributions of 
the customers served by the Market Participant at each Load Asset.  Daily Coincident Peak Contribution 
values shall be submitted by the Assigned Meter Reader or Host Participant by the meter reading deadline 
to the ISO.  
 
Commercial Capacity is capacity that has achieved FCM Commercial Operation. 
 
Commission is the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.  
 
Commitment Period is (i) for a Day-Ahead Energy Market commitment, a period of one or more 
contiguous hours for which a Resource is cleared in the Day-Ahead Energy Market, and (ii) for a Real-
Time Energy Market commitment, the period of time for which the ISO indicates the Resource is being 
committed when it issues the Dispatch Instruction.  If the ISO does not indicate the period of time for 
which the Resource is being committed in the Real-Time Energy Market, then the Commitment Period is 
the Minimum Run Time for an offline Resource and one hour for an online Resource. 
 
Common Costs are those costs associated with a Station that are avoided only by the clearing of the 
Static De-List Bids, the Permanent De-List Bids, or the Retirement De-List Bids of all the Existing 
Generating Capacity Resources comprising the Station.  
 
Completed Application is an Application that satisfies all of the information and other requirements of 
the OATT, including any required deposit.  
 
Compliance Effective Date is the date upon which the changes in the predecessor NEPOOL Open 
Access Transmission Tariff which have been reflected herein to comply with the Commission’s Order of 
April 20, 1998 became effective.  
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Composite FCM Transaction is a transaction for separate resources seeking to participate as a single 
composite resource in a Forward Capacity Auction in which multiple Designated FCM Participants 
provide capacity, as described in Section III.13.1.5 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Confidential Information is defined in Section 2.1 of the ISO New England Information Policy, which 
is Attachment D to the Tariff. 
 
Confidentiality Agreement is Attachment 1 to the ISO New England Billing Policy. 
 
Congestion is a condition of the New England Transmission System in which transmission limitations 
prevent unconstrained regional economic dispatch of the power system.  Congestion is the condition that 
results in the Congestion Component of the Locational Marginal Price at one Location being different 
from the Congestion Component of the Locational Marginal Price at another Location during any given 
hour of the dispatch day in the Day-Ahead Energy Market or Real-Time Energy Market.  
 
Congestion Component is the component of the nodal price that reflects the marginal cost of congestion 
at a given Node or External Node relative to the reference point.  When used in connection with Zonal 
Price and Hub Price, the term Congestion Component refers to the Congestion Components of the nodal 
prices that comprise the Zonal Price and Hub Price weighted and averaged in the same way that nodal 
prices are weighted to determine Zonal Price and averaged to determine the Hub Price.  
 
Congestion Cost is the cost of congestion as measured by the difference between the Congestion 
Components of the Locational Marginal Prices at different Locations and/or Reliability Regions on the 
New England Transmission System.  
 
Congestion Paying LSE is, for the purpose of the allocation of FTR Auction Revenues to ARR Holders 
as provided for in Appendix C of Market Rule 1, a Market Participant or Non-Market Participant 
Transmission Customer that is responsible for paying for Congestion Costs as a Transmission Customer 
paying for Regional Network Service under the Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff, unless such 
Transmission Customer has transferred its obligation to supply load in accordance with ISO New England 
System Rules, in which case the Congestion Paying LSE shall be the Market Participant supplying the 
transferred load obligation.  The term Congestion Paying LSE shall be deemed to include, but not be 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
limited to, the seller of internal bilateral transactions that transfer Real-Time Load Obligations under the 
ISO New England System Rules.  
 
Congestion Revenue Fund is the amount available for payment of target allocations to FTR Holders 
from the collection of Congestion Cost. 
 
Congestion Shortfall means congestion payments exceed congestion charges during the billing process 
in any billing period. 
 
Continuous Storage ATRR is an ATRR that participates in the New England Markets as part of a 
Continuous Storage Facility, as described in Section III.1.10.6 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Continuous Storage DARD is a DARD that participates in the New England Markets as part of a 
Continuous Storage Facility, as described in Section III.1.10.6 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Continuous Storage Generator Asset is a Generator Asset that participates in the New England Markets 
as part of a Continuous Storage Facility, as described in Section III.1.10.6 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Continuous Storage Facility is a type of Electric Storage Facility, as described in Section III.1.10.6 of 
Market Rule 1. 
 
Control Agreement is the document posted on the ISO website that is required if a Market Participant’s 
cash collateral is to be invested in BlackRock funds. 
 
Control Area is an electric power system or combination of electric power systems to which a common 
automatic generation control scheme is applied in order to:  
 
(1)  
match, at all times, the power output of the generators within the electric power system(s) and 
capacity and energy purchased from entities outside the electric power system(s), with the load within the 
electric power system(s);  
(2) 
 maintain scheduled interchange with other Control Areas, within the limits of Good Utility 
Practice;  
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
(3) 
 maintain the frequency of the electric power system(s) within reasonable limits in accordance 
with Good Utility Practice and the criteria of the applicable regional reliability council or the North 
American Electric Reliability Corporation; and  
(4)  
provide sufficient generating capacity to maintain operating reserves in accordance with Good 
Utility Practice.   
 
Controllable Behind-the-Meter Generation means generation whose output can be controlled located at 
the same facility as a DARD or a Demand Response Asset, excluding: (1) generators whose output is 
separately metered and reported and (2) generators that cannot operate electrically synchronized to, and 
that are operated only when the facility loses its supply of power from, the New England Transmission 
System, or when undergoing related testing. 
 
Coordinated External Transaction is an External Transaction at an external interface for which the 
enhanced scheduling procedures in Section III.1.10.7.A are implemented.  A transaction to wheel energy 
into, out of or through the New England Control Area is not a Coordinated External Transaction.  
 
Coordinated Transaction Scheduling means the enhanced scheduling procedures set forth in Section 
III.1.10.7.A. 
 
Correction Limit means the date that is one hundred and one (101) calendar days from the last Operating 
Day of the month to which the data applied.  As described in Section III.3.6.1 of Market Rule 1, this will 
be the period during which meter data corrections must be submitted unless they qualify for submission 
as a Requested Billing Adjustment under Section III.3.7 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Cost of Energy Consumed (CEC) is one of four forms of compensation that may be paid to resources 
providing VAR Service under Schedule 2 of the OATT. 
 
Cost of Energy Produced (CEP) is one of four forms of compensation that may be paid to resources 
providing VAR Service under Schedule 2 of the OATT. 
 
Cost of New Entry (CONE) is the estimated cost of new entry ($/kW-month) for a capacity resource that 
is determined by the ISO for each Forward Capacity Auction pursuant to Section III.13.2.4.  
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Counterparty means the status in which the ISO acts as the contracting party, in its name and own right 
and not as an agent, to an agreement or transaction with a Customer (including assignments involving 
Customers) involving sale to the ISO, and/or purchase from the ISO, of Regional Transmission Service 
and market and other products and services, and other transactions and assignments involving Customers, 
all as described in the Tariff. 
 
Covered Entity is defined in the ISO New England Billing Policy.  
 
Credit Coverage is third-party credit protection obtained by the ISO in the form of credit insurance 
coverage. 
 
Credit Qualifying means a Rated Market Participant that has an Investment Grade Rating and an 
Unrated Market Participant that satisfies the Credit Threshold. 
 
Credit Threshold consists of the conditions for Unrated Market Participants outlined in Section II.B.2 of 
the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy. 
 
Critical Energy Infrastructure Information (CEII) is defined in Section 3.0(j) of the ISO New 
England Information Policy, which is Attachment D to the Tariff. 
 
Current Ratio is, on any date, all of a Market Participant’s or Non-Market Participant Transmission 
Customer’s current assets divided by all of its current liabilities, in each case as shown on the most recent 
financial statements provided by such Market Participant or Non-Market Participant Transmission 
Customer to the ISO. 
 
Curtailment is a reduction in the dispatch of a transaction that was scheduled, using transmission service, 
in response to a transfer capability shortage as a result of system reliability conditions.  
 
Customer is a Market Participant, a Transmission Customer or another customer of the ISO. 
 
Cyber Security Exigency is a suspicious or malicious electronic act or event that compromises or 
attempts to compromise, or disrupts or attempts to disrupt, the ongoing operation of the ISO, the New 
England Markets, or reliability within the New England Control Area or other electrical facilities directly 
or indirectly connected to the New England Transmission System and (i) whose severity or nature 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
reasonably requires that the ISO obtain expert assistance not normally called upon to counter such an 
electronic act or resolve such an event or (ii) whose nature requires the ISO to report such an electronic 
act or event pursuant to NERC Critical Infrastructure Protection Reliability Standards or applicable 
regulations promulgated by the Department of Homeland Security, the Department of Energy, or a federal 
agency with similar cybersecurity responsibilities (or any of their respective successor organizations or 
agencies). 
 
Data Reconciliation Process means the process by which meter reconciliation and data corrections that 
are discovered by Governance Participants after the Invoice has been issued for a particular month or that 
are discovered prior to the issuance of the Invoice for the relevant month but not included in that Invoice 
or in the other Invoices for that month and are reconciled by the ISO on an hourly basis based on data 
submitted to the ISO by the Host Participant Assigned Meter Reader or Assigned Meter Reader.  
 
Day-Ahead is the calendar day immediately preceding the Operating Day.  
 
Day-Ahead Adjusted Load Obligation is defined in Section III.3.2.1(a) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Day-Ahead Congestion Revenue is defined in Section III.3.2.1(i) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Day-Ahead Demand Reduction Obligation is defined in Section III.3.2.1(a) of Market Rule 1. 
 
Day-Ahead Energy Market means the schedule of commitments for the purchase or sale of energy, 
purchase of demand reductions, payment of Congestion Costs, payment for losses developed by the ISO 
as a result of the offers and specifications submitted in accordance with Section III.1.10 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Day-Ahead Energy Market Congestion Charge/Credit is defined in Section III.3.2.1(f) of Market Rule 
1.  
 
Day-Ahead Energy Market Energy Charge/Credit is defined in Section III.3.2.1(f) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Day-Ahead Energy Market Loss Charge/Credit is defined in Section III.3.2.1(f) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Day-Ahead Energy Market NCPC Credit is an NCPC Credit calculated pursuant to Appendix F to 
Market Rule 1. 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Day-Ahead External Transaction Export and Decrement Bid NCPC Credit is an NCPC Credit 
calculated pursuant to Appendix F to Market Rule 1. 
 
 
Day-Ahead External Transaction Import and Increment Offer NCPC Credit is an NCPC Credit 
calculated pursuant to Appendix F to Market Rule 1. 
 
Day-Ahead Generation Obligation is defined in Section III.3.2.1(a) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Day-Ahead Load Obligation is defined in Section III.3.2.1(a) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Day-Ahead Locational Adjusted Net Interchange is defined in Section III.3.2.1(a) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Day-Ahead Loss Charges or Credits is defined in Section III.3.2.1(k) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Day-Ahead Loss Revenue is defined in Section III.3.2.1(j) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Day-Ahead Prices means the Locational Marginal Prices resulting from the Day-Ahead Energy Market.  
 
DDP Dispatchable Resource is any Dispatchable Resource that the ISO dispatches using Desired 
Dispatch Points in the Resource’s Dispatch Instructions. 
 
Debt-to-Total Capitalization Ratio is, on any date, a Market Participant’s or Non-Market Participant 
Transmission Customer’s total debt (including all current borrowings) divided by its total shareholders’ 
equity plus total debt, in each case as shown on the most recent financial statements provided by such 
Market Participant or Non-Market Participant Transmission Customer to the ISO. 
 
Decrement Bid means a bid to purchase energy at a specified Location in the Day-Ahead Energy Market 
which is not associated with a physical load.  An accepted Decrement Bid results in scheduled load at the 
specified Location in the Day-Ahead Energy Market.  
 
Default Amount is all or any part of any amount due to be paid by any Covered Entity that the ISO, in its 
reasonable opinion, believes will not or has not been paid when due (other than in the case of a payment 
dispute for any amount due for transmission service under the OATT). 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Default Period is defined in Section 3.3.h(i) of the ISO New England Billing Policy. 
 
Delivering Party is the entity supplying capacity and/or energy to be transmitted at Point(s) of Receipt 
under the OATT.  
 
Demand Bid means a request to purchase an amount of energy, at a specified Location, or an amount of 
energy at a specified price, that is associated with a physical load.  A cleared Demand Bid in the Day-
Ahead Energy Market results in scheduled load at the specified Location.  Demand Bids submitted for use 
in the Real-Time Energy Market are specific to Dispatchable Asset Related Demands only.  
 
Demand Bid Block-Hours are the Block-Hours assigned to the submitting Customer for each Demand 
Bid.  
 
Demand Bid Cap is $2,000/MWh. 
 
Demand Capacity Resource means an Existing Demand Capacity Resource or a New Demand Capacity 
Resource.  There are three Demand Capacity Resource types: Active Demand Capacity Resources, On-
Peak Demand Resources, and Seasonal Peak Demand Resources.  
 
Demand Designated Entity is the entity designated by a Market Participant to receive Dispatch 
Instructions for Demand Response Resources in accordance with the provisions set forth in ISO New 
England Operating Procedure No. 14. 
 
Demand Reduction Offer is an offer by a Market Participant with a Demand Response Resource to 
reduce demand. 
 
Demand Reduction Offer Block-Hours are Block-Hours assigned to the Lead Market Participant for 
each Demand Reduction Offer.  Blocks of the Demand Reduction Offer in effect for each hour will be 
totaled to determine the quantity of Demand Reduction Offer Block-Hours for a given day. In the case 
that a Resource has a Real-Time unit status of “unavailable” for the entire day, that day will not 
contribute to the quantity of Demand Reduction Offer Block-Hours.  However, if the Resource has at 
least one hour of the day with a unit status of “available,” the entire day will contribute to the quantity of 
Demand Reduction Offer Block-Hours. 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Demand Reduction Threshold Price is a minimum offer price calculated pursuant to Section 
III.1.10.1A(f). 
 
Demand Resource On-Peak Hours are hours ending 1400 through 1700, Monday through Friday on 
non-Demand Response Holidays during the months of June, July, and August and hours ending 1800 
through 1900, Monday through Friday on non-Demand Response Holidays during the months of 
December and January.  
 
Demand Resource Seasonal Peak Hours are those hours in which the actual, real-time hourly load, as 
measured using real-time telemetry (adjusted for transmission and distribution losses, and excluding load 
associated with Exports and Storage DARDs) for Monday through Friday on non-Demand Response 
Holidays, during the months of June, July, August, December, and January, as determined by the ISO, is 
equal to or greater than 90% of the most recent 50/50 system peak load forecast, as determined by the 
ISO, for the applicable summer or winter season.  
 
Demand Response Asset is an asset comprising the demand reduction capability of an individual end-use 
customer at a Retail Delivery Point or the aggregated demand reduction capability of multiple end-use 
customers from multiple delivery points (as described in Section III.8.1.1(f)) that has been registered in 
accordance with III.8.1.1. 
 
Demand Response Available is the capability of the Demand Response Resource, in whole or in part, at 
any given time, to reduce demand in response to a Dispatch Instruction. 
 
Demand Response Baseline is the expected baseline demand of an individual end-use metered customer 
or group of end-use metered customers as determined pursuant to Section III.8.2. 
 
Demand Response Holiday is New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, 
Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day.  If the holiday falls on a Saturday, the holiday will 
be observed on the preceding Friday; if the holiday falls on a Sunday, the holiday will be observed on the 
following Monday. 
 
Demand Response Distributed Energy Resource Aggregation (DRDERA) is a type of Distributed 
Energy Resource Aggregation that is described in additional detail in Section III.6.5. 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Demand Response Resource is an individual Demand Response Asset or aggregation of Demand 
Response Assets within a DRR Aggregation Zone that has been registered in accordance with Section 
III.8.1.2. 
 
Demand Response Resource Notification Time is the period of time between the receipt of a startup 
Dispatch Instruction and the time the Demand Response Resource starts reducing demand. 
 
Demand Response Resource Ramp Rate is the average rate, expressed in MW per minute, at which the 
Demand Response Resource can reduce demand. 
 
Demand Response Resource Start-Up Time is the period of time between the time a Demand Response 
Resource starts reducing demand at the conclusion of the Demand Response Resource Notification Time 
and the time the resource can reach its Minimum Reduction and be ready for further dispatch by the ISO. 
 
Designated Agent is any entity that performs actions or functions required under the OATT on behalf of 
the ISO, a Transmission Owner, a Schedule 20A Service Provider, an Eligible Customer, or a 
Transmission Customer.  
 
Designated Blackstart Resource is a resource that meets the eligibility requirements specified in 
Schedule 16 of the OATT, which includes any resource referred to previously as a Category B Designated 
Blackstart Resource. 
 
Designated Entity is the entity designated by a Market Participant to receive Dispatch Instructions for a 
Generator Asset and/or Dispatchable Asset Related Demand in accordance with the provisions set forth in 
ISO New England Operating Procedure No. 14. 
 
Designated FCM Participant is any Lead Market Participant, including any Provisional Member that is 
a Lead Market Participant, transacting in any Forward Capacity Auction, reconfiguration auctions or 
Capacity Supply Obligation Bilateral for capacity that is otherwise required to provide additional 
financial assurance under the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy. 
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Designated FTR Participant is a Market Participant, including FTR-Only Customers, transacting in the 
FTR Auction that is otherwise required to provide additional financial assurance under the ISO New 
England Financial Assurance Policy. 
 
Desired Dispatch Point (DDP) means the control signal, expressed in megawatts, transmitted to direct 
the output, consumption, or demand reduction level of each Generator Asset, Dispatchable Asset Related 
Demand, or Demand Response Resource dispatched by the ISO in accordance with the asset’s Offer Data. 
 
Direct Assignment Facilities are facilities or portions of facilities that are constructed for the sole 
use/benefit of a particular Transmission Customer requesting service under the OATT or a Generator 
Owner requesting an interconnection.  Direct Assignment Facilities shall be specified in a separate 
agreement among the ISO, Interconnection Customer and Transmission Customer, as applicable, and the 
Transmission Owner whose transmission system is to be modified to include and/or interconnect with the 
Direct Assignment Facilities, shall be subject to applicable Commission requirements, and shall be paid 
for by the Customer in accordance with the applicable agreement and the Tariff.  
 
Directly Metered Assets are specifically measured by OP-18 compliant metering as currently described 
in Section IV (Metering and Recording for Settlements) of OP-18.  Directly Metered Assets include all 
Tie-Line Assets, all Generator Assets, as well as some Load Assets.  Load Assets for which the Host 
Participant is not the Assigned Meter Reader are considered Directly Metered Assets. In addition, the 
Host Participant Assigned Meter Reader determines which additional Load Assets are considered Directly 
Metered Assets and which ones are considered Profiled Load Assets based upon the Host Participant 
Assigned Meter Reader reporting systems and process by which the Host Participant Assigned Meter 
Reader allocates non-PTF losses.  
 
Disbursement Agreement is the Rate Design and Funds Disbursement Agreement among the PTOs, as 
amended and restated from time to time.  
 
Dispatch Instruction means directions given by the ISO to Market Participants, which may include 
instructions to start up, shut down, raise or lower generation, curtail or restore loads from Demand 
Response Resources, change External Transactions, or change the status or consumption of a 
Dispatchable Asset Related Demand in accordance with the Supply Offer, Demand Bid, or Demand 
Reduction Offer parameters.  Such instructions may also require a change to the operation of a Pool 
Transmission Facility. Such instructions are given through either electronic or verbal means.  
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Dispatch Zone means a subset of Nodes located within a Load Zone established by the ISO for each 
Capacity Commitment Period pursuant to Section III.12.4A.  
 
Dispatchable Asset Related Demand (DARD) is an Asset Related Demand that is capable of having its 
energy consumption modified in Real-Time in response to Dispatch Instructions. A DARD must be 
capable of receiving and responding to electronic Dispatch Instructions, must be able to increase or 
decrease energy consumption between its Minimum Consumption Limit and Maximum Consumption 
Limit in accordance with Dispatch Instructions, and must meet the technical requirements specified in the 
ISO New England Operating Procedures and Manuals.  
 
Dispatchable Resource is any Generator Asset, Dispatchable Asset Related Demand, Demand Response 
Resource, or, with respect to the Regulation Market only, Alternative Technology Regulation Resource, 
that, during the course of normal operation, is capable of receiving and responding to electronic Dispatch 
Instructions in accordance with the parameters contained in the Resource’s Supply Offer, Demand Bid, 
Demand Reduction Offer or Regulation Service Offer.  A Resource that is normally classified as a 
Dispatchable Resource remains a Dispatchable Resource when it is temporarily not capable of receiving 
and responding to electronic Dispatch Instructions. 
 
Dispute Representatives are defined in 6.5.c of the ISO New England Billing Policy. 
 
Disputed Amount is a Covered Entity’s disputed amount due on any fully paid monthly Invoice and/or 
any amount believed to be due or owed on a Remittance Advice, as defined in Section 6 of the ISO New 
England Billing Policy. 
 
Disputing Party, for the purposes of the ISO New England Billing Policy, is any Covered Entity seeking 
to recover a Disputed Amount.  
 
Distributed Energy Capacity Resource (DECR) means an Existing Distributed Energy Capacity 
Resource or a New Distributed Energy Capacity Resource. 
 
Distributed Energy Resource (DER) is any resource located on the distribution system, any subsystem 
thereof or behind a customer meter that is capable of providing energy injection, energy withdrawal, 
regulation, or demand reduction.  
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Distributed Energy Resource Aggregation (DERA) is an aggregation of Distributed Energy Resources 
that is registered under Section III.6.7 and is described in additional detail in Section III.6. 
 
Distributed Energy Resource Aggregator (DER Aggregator) is a Market Participant that aggregates 
one or more Distributed Energy Resources for participation in a Distributed Energy Resource 
Aggregation and serves as the Lead Market Participant for a Distributed Energy Resource Aggregation. 
 
Distributed Generation means generation directly connected to end-use customer load and located 
behind the end-use customer’s Retail Delivery Point that reduces the amount of energy that would 
otherwise have been produced on the electricity network in the New England Control Area, provided that 
the facility’s Net Supply Capability is (i) less than 5 MW or (ii) less than or equal to the Maximum 
Facility Load, whichever is greater.  
 
DRR Aggregation Zone is a Dispatch Zone entirely within a single Reserve Zone or Rest of System or, 
where a Dispatch Zone is not entirely within a single Reserve Zone or Rest of System, each portion of the 
Dispatch Zone demarcated by the Reserve Zone boundary. 
 
Do Not Exceed (DNE) Dispatchable Generator is any Generator Asset that is dispatched using Do Not 
Exceed Dispatch Points in its Dispatch Instructions and meets the criteria specified in Section 
III.1.11.3(e).   Do Not Exceed Dispatchable Generators are Dispatchable Resources. 
 
Do Not Exceed Dispatch Point is a Dispatch Instruction indicating a maximum output level that a DNE 
Dispatchable Generator must not exceed. 
 
Dynamic De-List Bid is a bid that may be submitted by Existing Generating Capacity Resources, 
Existing Import Capacity Resources, Existing Demand Capacity Resources, and Existing Distributed 
Energy Capacity Resources in the Forward Capacity Auction below the Dynamic De-List Bid Threshold, 
as described in Section III.13.2.3.2(d) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Dynamic De-List Bid Threshold is the price specified in Section III.13.1.2.3.1.A of Market Rule 1 
associated with the submission of Dynamic De-List Bids in the Forward Capacity Auction. 
 
EA Amount is defined in Section IV.B.2.2 of the Tariff.  
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Early Amortization Charge (EAC) is defined in Section IV.B.2 of the Tariff.  
 
Early Amortization Working Capital Charge (EAWCC) is defined in Section IV.B.2 of the Tariff.  
 
Early Payment Shortfall Funding Amount (EPSF Amount) is defined in Section IV.B.2.4 of the 
Tariff. 
 
Early Payment Shortfall Funding Charge (EPSFC) is defined in Section IV.B.2 of the Tariff.  
 
EAWW Amount is defined in Section IV.B.2.3 of the Tariff.  
 
EBITDA-to-Interest Expense Ratio is, on any date, a Market Participant’s or Non-Market Participant 
Transmission Customer’s earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization in the most recent 
fiscal quarter divided by that Market Participant’s or Non-Market Participant Transmission Customer’s 
expense for interest in that fiscal quarter, in each case as shown on the most recent financial statements 
provided by such Market Participant or Non-Market Participant Transmission Customer to the ISO.  
 
Economic Dispatch Point is the output, reduction, or consumption level to which a Resource would have 
been dispatched, based on the Resource’s Supply Offer, Demand Reduction Offer,  or Demand Bid and 
the Real-Time Price, and taking account of any operating limits, had the ISO not dispatched the Resource 
to another Desired Dispatch Point. 
 
Economic Maximum Limit or Economic Max is the maximum available output, in MW, of a Generator 
Asset that a Market Participant offers to supply in the Day-Ahead Energy Market or Real-Time Energy 
Market, as reflected in the Generator Asset’s Offer Data.  This represents the highest MW output a 
Market Participant has offered for a Generator Asset for economic dispatch.  A Market Participant must 
maintain an up-to-date Economic Maximum Limit (and where applicable, must provide the ISO with any 
telemetry required by ISO New England Operating Procedure No. 18 to allow the ISO to maintain an 
updated Economic Maximum Limit) for all hours in which a Generator Asset has been offered into the 
Day-Ahead Energy Market or Real-Time Energy Market.   
 
Economic Minimum Limit or Economic Min is (a) for a Generator Asset with an incremental heat rate, 
the maximum of:  (i) the lowest sustainable output level as specified by physical design characteristics, 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
environmental regulations or licensing limits; and (ii) the lowest sustainable output level at which a one 
MW increment increase in the output level would not decrease the incremental cost, calculated based on 
the incremental heat rate, of providing an additional MW of output, and (b) for a Generator Asset without 
an incremental heat rate, the lowest sustainable output level that is consistent with the physical design 
characteristics of the Generator Asset and with meeting all environmental regulations and licensing limits, 
and (c) for a Generator Asset undergoing Facility and Equipment Testing or auditing, the level to which 
the Generator Asset requests and is approved to operate or is directed to operate for purposes of 
completing the Facility and Equipment Testing or auditing, and (d) for Non-Dispatchable Resources the 
output level at which a Market Participant anticipates its Non-Dispatchable Resource will be available to 
operate based on fuel limitations, physical design characteristics, environmental regulations or licensing 
limits.  
 
Economic Study or Economic Studies are studies described in Section 17 of Attachment K to the OATT 
that are used to examine situations where potential regulated transmission solutions, market responses, or 
investments could result in (i) a net reduction in total production cost to supply system load based on the 
factors specified in Attachment N of the OATT, (ii) reduced congestion, or (iii) the integration of new 
resources or loads, or both, on an aggregate or regional basis.  
 
Effective Offer is the Supply Offer, Demand Reduction Offer, or Demand Bid that is used for NCPC 
calculation purposes as specified in Section III.F.1(a). 
 
EFT is electronic funds transfer. 
 
Elective Transmission Upgrade is defined in Section I of Schedule 25 of the OATT.  
 
Elective Transmission Upgrade Interconnection Customer is defined in Schedule 25 of the OATT. 
 
Electric Reliability Organization (ERO) is defined in 18 C.F.R. § 39.1.  
  
Electric Storage Facility is a storage facility that participates in the New England Markets as described 
in Section III.1.10.6 of Market Rule 1. 
 
 
Eligible Customer is: (i) Any entity that is engaged, or proposes to engage, in the wholesale or retail 
electric power business is an Eligible Customer under the OATT.  (ii) Any electric utility (including any 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
power marketer), Federal power marketing agency, or any other entity generating electric energy for sale 
or for resale is an Eligible Customer under the OATT.  Electric energy sold or produced by such entity 
may be electric energy produced in the United States, Canada or Mexico. However, with respect to 
transmission service that the Commission is prohibited from ordering by Section 212(h) of the Federal 
Power Act, such entity is eligible only if the service is provided pursuant to a state requirement that the 
Transmission Owner with which that entity is directly interconnected or the distribution company having 
the service territory in which that entity is located (if that entity is a retail customer) offer the unbundled 
transmission service or Local Delivery Service, or pursuant to a voluntary offer of such service by the 
Transmission Owner with which that entity is directly interconnected or the distribution company having 
the service territory in which that entity is located (if that entity is a retail customer).  (iii) Any end user 
taking or eligible to take unbundled transmission service or Local Delivery Service pursuant to a state 
requirement that the Transmission Owner with which that end user is directly interconnected or the 
distribution company having the service territory in which that entity is located (if that entity is a retail 
customer) offer the transmission service or Local Delivery Service, or pursuant to a voluntary offer of 
such service by the Transmission Owner with which that end user is directly interconnected, or the 
distribution company having the service territory in which that entity is located (if that entity is a retail 
customer) is an Eligible Customer under the OATT.  
 
Eligible FTR Bidder is an entity that has satisfied applicable financial assurance criteria, and shall not 
include the auctioneer, its Affiliates, and their officers, directors, employees, consultants and other 
representatives.  
 
Emergency is an abnormal system condition on the bulk power systems of New England or neighboring 
Control Areas requiring manual or automatic action to maintain system frequency, or to prevent the 
involuntary loss of load, equipment damage, or tripping of system elements that could adversely affect the 
reliability of an electric system or the safety of persons or property; or a fuel shortage requiring departure 
from normal operating procedures in order to minimize the use of such scarce fuel; or a condition that 
requires implementation of Emergency procedures as defined in the ISO New England Manuals.  
 
Emergency Condition means an Emergency has been declared by the ISO in accordance with the 
procedures set forth in the ISO New England Manuals and ISO New England Administrative Procedures.  
 
Emergency Energy is energy transferred from one control area operator to another in an Emergency.  
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Emergency Minimum Limit or Emergency Min means the minimum output, in MWs, that a Generator 
Asset can deliver for a limited period of time without exceeding specified limits of equipment stability 
and operating permits.  
 
EMS is energy management system.  
 
End-of-Round Price is the lowest price associated with a round of a Forward Capacity Auction, as 
described in Section III.13.2.3.1 of Market Rule 1.  
 
End User Participant is defined in Section 1 of the Participants Agreement. 
 
Energy is power produced in the form of electricity, measured in kilowatthours or megawatthours.  
 
Energy Administration Service (EAS) is the service provided by the ISO, as described in Schedule 2 of 
Section IV.A of the Tariff.  
 
Energy Component means the Locational Marginal Price at the reference point.  
 
Energy Efficiency is installed measures (e.g., products, equipment, systems, services, practices and/or 
strategies) on end-use customer facilities that reduce the total amount of electrical energy needed, while 
delivering a comparable or improved level of end-use service.  Such measures include, but are not limited 
to, the installation of more energy efficient lighting, motors, refrigeration, HVAC equipment and control 
systems, envelope measures, operations and maintenance procedures, and industrial process equipment.  
 
Energy Imbalance Service is the form of Ancillary Service described in Schedule 4 of the OATT.  
 
Energy Market is, collectively, the Day-Ahead Energy Market and the Real-Time Energy Market.  
 
Energy Non-Zero Spot Market Settlement Hours are the sum of the hours for which the Customer has 
a positive or negative Real-Time System Adjusted Net Interchange or for which the Customer has a 
positive or negative Real-Time Demand Reduction Obligation as determined by the ISO settlement 
process for the Energy Market.  
 
Energy Offer Floor is negative $150/MWh. 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Energy Transaction Units (Energy TUs) are the sum for the month for a Customer of Bilateral Contract 
Block-Hours, Demand Bid Block-Hours, Asset Related Demand Bid Block-Hours, Supply Offer Block-
Hours, Demand Reduction Offer Block-Hours, and Energy Non-Zero Spot Market Settlement Hours.  
 
Equipment Damage Reimbursement is the compensation paid to the owner of a Designated Blackstart 
Resource as specified in Section 5.5 of Schedule 16 to the OATT. 
 
Equivalent Demand Forced Outage Rate (EFORd) means the portion of time a unit is in demand, but 
is unavailable due to forced outages.  
 
Estimated Capacity Load Obligation is, for the purposes of the ISO New England Financial Assurance 
Policy, a Market Participant’s share of Zonal Capacity Obligation from the latest available month, 
adjusted as appropriate to account for any relevant Capacity Load Obligation Bilaterals, HQICCs, and 
Self-Supplied FCA Resource designations for the applicable month. 
 
Establish Claimed Capability Audit is the audit performed pursuant to Section III.1.5.1.2. 
 
Excepted Transaction is a transaction specified in Section II.40 of the Tariff for the applicable period 
specified in that Section.  
 
Existing Capacity Qualification Deadline is a deadline, specified in Section III.13.1.10 of Market Rule 
1, for submission of certain qualification materials for the Forward Capacity Auction, as discussed in 
Section III.13.1 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Existing Capacity Qualification Package is information submitted for certain existing resources prior to 
participation in the Forward Capacity Auction, as described in Section III.13.1 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Existing Capacity Resource is any resource that does not meet any of the eligibility criteria to participate 
in the Forward Capacity Auction as a New Capacity Resource.  
 
Existing Capacity Retirement Deadline is a deadline, specified in Section III.13.1.10 of Market Rule 1, 
for submission of certain qualification materials for the Forward Capacity Auction, as discussed in 
Section III.13.1 of Market Rule 1. 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Existing Capacity Retirement Package is information submitted for certain existing resources prior to 
participation in the Forward Capacity Auction, as described in Section III.13.1 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Existing Demand Capacity Resource is a type of Demand Capacity Resource participating in the 
Forward Capacity Market, as defined in Section III.13.1.4.2 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Existing Distributed Energy Capacity Resource is a type of Distributed Energy Capacity Resource 
participating in the Forward Capacity Market, as defined in Section III.13.1.4A.2 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Existing Generating Capacity Resource is a type of resource participating in the Forward Capacity 
Market, as defined in Section III.13.1.2.1 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Existing Import Capacity Resource is a type of resource participating in the Forward Capacity Market, 
as defined in Section III.13.1.3.1 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Expedited Study Request is defined in Section II.34.7 of the OATT. 
 
Export-Adjusted LSR is as defined in Section III.12.4(b)(ii).  
 
Export Bid is a bid that may be submitted by certain resources in the Forward Capacity Auction to export 
capacity to an external Control Area, as described in Section III.13.1.2.3.1.3 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Exports are Real-Time External Transactions, which are limited to sales from the New England Control 
Area, for exporting energy out of the New England Control Area.  
 
External Elective Transmission Upgrade (External ETU) is defined in Section I of Schedule 25 of the 
OATT. 
 
External Market Monitor means the person or entity appointed by the ISO Board of Directors pursuant 
to Section III.A.1.2 of Appendix A of Market Rule 1 to carry out the market monitoring and mitigation 
functions specified in Appendix A and elsewhere in Market Rule 1.  
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
External Node is a proxy bus or buses used for establishing a Locational Marginal Price for energy 
received by Market Participants from, or delivered by Market Participants to, a neighboring Control Area 
or for establishing Locational Marginal Prices associated with energy delivered through the New England 
Control Area by Non-Market Participants for use in calculating Non-Market Participant Congestion Costs 
and loss costs.  
 
External Resource means a generation resource located outside the metered boundaries of the New 
England Control Area.  
 
External Transaction is the import of external energy into the New England Control Area by a Market 
Participant or the export of internal energy out of the New England Control Area by a Market Participant 
in the Day-Ahead Energy Market and/or Real-Time Energy Market, or the wheeling of external energy 
through the New England Control Area by a Market Participant or a Non-Market Participant in the Real-
Time Energy Market.  
 
External Transaction Cap is $2,000/MWh for External Transactions other than Coordinated External 
Transactions and $1,000/MWh for Coordinated External Transactions. 
 
External Transaction Floor is the Energy Offer Floor for External Transactions other than Coordinated 
External Transactions and negative $1,000/MWh for Coordinated External Transactions. 
 
External Transmission Project is a transmission project comprising facilities located wholly outside the 
New England Control Area and regarding which an agreement has been reached whereby New England 
ratepayers will support all or a portion of the cost of the facilities. 
 
Facilities Study is an engineering study conducted pursuant to the OATT by the ISO (or, in the case of 
Local Service or interconnections to Local Area Facilities as defined in the TOA, by one or more affected 
PTOs) or some other entity designated by the ISO in consultation with any affected Transmission 
Owner(s), to determine the required modifications to the PTF and Non-PTF, including the cost and 
scheduled completion date for such modifications, that will be required to provide a requested 
transmission service or interconnection on the PTF and Non-PTF.  
 
Facility and Equipment Testing means operation of a Resource to evaluate the functionality of the 
facility or equipment utilized in the operation of the facility. 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Failure to Maintain Blackstart Capability is a failure of a Blackstart Owner or Designated Blackstart 
Resource to meet the Blackstart Service Minimum Criteria or Blackstart Service obligations, but does not 
include a Failure to Perform During a System Restoration event.  
 
Failure to Perform During a System Restoration is a failure of a Blackstart Owner or Designated 
Blackstart Resource to follow ISO or Local Control Center dispatch instructions or perform in accordance 
with the dispatch instructions or the Blackstart Service Minimum Criteria and Blackstart Service 
obligations, described within the ISO New England Operating Documents, during a restoration of the 
New England Transmission System. 
 
Fast Start Demand Response Resource is a Demand Response Resource that meets the following 
criteria: (i) Minimum Reduction Time does not exceed one hour; (ii) Minimum Time Between Reductions 
does not exceed one hour; (iii) Demand Response Resource Start-Up Time plus Demand Response 
Resource Notification Time does not exceed 30 minutes; (iv) has personnel available to respond to 
Dispatch Instructions or has automatic remote response capability; and (v) is capable of receiving and 
acknowledging a Dispatch Instruction electronically. 
 
Fast Start Generator means a Generator Asset that the ISO can dispatch to an on-line or off-line state 
through electronic dispatch and that meets the following criteria:  (i) Minimum Run Time does not exceed 
one hour; (ii) Minimum Down Time does not exceed one hour; (iii) cold Notification Time plus cold 
Start-Up Time does not exceed 30 minutes; (iv) available for dispatch (when it is either in an on-line or 
off-line state) and manned or has automatic remote dispatch capability; and (v) capable of receiving and 
acknowledging a start-up or shut-down Dispatch Instruction electronically.  
 
FCA Cleared Export Transaction is defined in Section III.1.10.7(f)(ii) of Market Rule 1.  
 
FCA Qualified Capacity is the Qualified Capacity that is used in a Forward Capacity Auction. 
 
FCM Capacity Charge Requirements are calculated in accordance with Section VII.C of the ISO New 
England Financial Assurance Policy. 
 
FCM Charge Rate is calculated in accordance with Section VII.C of the ISO New England Financial 
Assurance Policy. 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
FCM Commercial Operation is defined in Section III.13.3.8 of Market Rule 1.  
 
FCM Deposit is calculated in accordance with Section VII.B.1 of the ISO New England Financial 
Assurance Policy. 
 
FCM Financial Assurance Requirements are described in Section VII of the ISO New England 
Financial Assurance Policy. 
 
Final Forward Reserve Obligation is calculated in accordance with Section III.9.8(a) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Financial Assurance Default results from a Market Participant or Non-Market Participant Transmission 
Customer’s failure to comply with the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy. 
 
Financial Assurance Obligations relative to the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy are 
determined in accordance with Section III.A(v) of the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy. 
 
Financial Transmission Right (FTR) is a financial instrument that evidences the rights and obligations 
specified in Sections III.5.2.2 and III.7 of the Tariff.  
 
Firm Point-To-Point Service is service which is arranged for and administered between specified Points 
of Receipt and Delivery in accordance with Part II.C of the OATT.  
 
Firm Transmission Service is Regional Network Service, Through or Out Service, service for Excepted 
Transactions, firm MTF Service, firm OTF Service, and firm Local Service.  
 
Flexible DNE Dispatchable Generator is any DNE Dispatchable Generator that meets the following 
criteria: (i) Minimum Run Time does not exceed one hour; (ii) Minimum Down Time does not exceed 
one hour; and (iii) cold Notification Time plus cold Start-Up Time does not exceed 30 minutes. 
 
Force Majeure - An event of Force Majeure means any act of God, labor disturbance, act of the public 
enemy or terrorists, war, invasion, insurrection, riot, fire, storm or flood, ice, explosion, breakage or 
accident to machinery or equipment, any curtailment, order, regulation or restriction imposed by 
governmental military or lawfully established civilian authorities, or any other cause beyond the control 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
of the ISO, a Transmission Owner, a Schedule 20A Service Provider, or a Customer, including without 
limitation, in the case of the ISO, any action or inaction by a Customer, a Schedule 20A Service Provider, 
or a Transmission Owner, in the case of a Transmission Owner, any action or inaction by the ISO, any 
Customer, a Schedule 20A Service Provider, or any other Transmission Owner, in the case of a Schedule 
20A Service Provider, any action or inaction by the ISO, any Customer, a Transmission Owner, or any 
other Schedule 20A Service Provider, and, in the case of a Transmission Customer, any action or inaction 
by the ISO, a Schedule 20A Service Provider, or any Transmission Owner.  
 
Forward Capacity Auction (FCA) is the annual Forward Capacity Market auction process described in 
Section III.13.2 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Forward Capacity Auction Starting Price is calculated in accordance with Section III.13.2.4 of Market 
Rule 1.  
 
Forward Capacity Market (FCM) is the forward market for procuring capacity in the New England 
Control Area, as described in Section III.13 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Forward Energy Inventory Election is the total MWh value for which a Market Participant elects to be 
compensated at the forward rate in the inventoried energy program as described in Section III.K.1(d) of 
Market Rule 1. 
 
Forward LNG Inventory Election is the portion of a Market Participant’s Forward Energy Inventory 
Election attributed to liquefied natural gas in the inventoried energy program as described in Section 
III.K.1(d) of Market Rule 1. 
 
Forward Reserve means TMNSR and TMOR purchased by the ISO on a forward basis on behalf of 
Market Participants as provided for in Section III.9 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Forward Reserve Assigned Megawatts is the amount of Forward Reserve, in megawatts, that a Market 
Participant assigns to eligible Forward Reserve Resources to meet its Forward Reserve Obligation as 
defined in Section III.9.4.1 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Forward Reserve Auction is the periodic auction conducted by the ISO in accordance with Section III.9 
of Market Rule 1 to procure Forward Reserve.  
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Forward Reserve Auction Offers are offers to provide Forward Reserve to meet system and Reserve 
Zone requirements as submitted by a Market Participant in accordance with Section III.9.3 of Market 
Rule 1.  
 
Forward Reserve Charge is a Market Participant’s share of applicable system and Reserve Zone 
Forward Reserve costs attributable to meeting the Forward Reserve requirement as calculated in 
accordance with Section III.9.9 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Forward Reserve Clearing Price is the clearing price for TMNSR or TMOR, as applicable, for the 
system and each Reserve Zone resulting from the Forward Reserve Auction as defined in Section III.9.4 
of Market Rule 1.  
 
Forward Reserve Credit is the credit received by a Market Participant that is associated with that 
Market Participant’s Final Forward Reserve Obligation as calculated in accordance with Section III.9.8 of 
Market Rule 1.  
 
Forward Reserve Delivered Megawatts are calculated in accordance with Section III.9.6.5 of Market 
Rule 1.  
 
Forward Reserve Delivery Period is defined in Section III.9.1 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Forward Reserve Failure-to-Activate Megawatts are calculated in accordance with Section III.9.7.2(a) 
of Market Rule 1. 
 
Forward Reserve Failure-to-Activate Penalty is the penalty associated with a Market Participant’s 
failure to activate Forward Reserve when requested to do so by the ISO and is defined in Section III.9.7.2 
of Market Rule 1. 
 
Forward Reserve Failure-to-Activate Penalty Rate is specified in Section III.9.7.2 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Forward Reserve Failure-to-Reserve, as specified in Section III.9.7.1 of Market Rule 1, occurs when a 
Market Participant’s Forward Reserve Delivered Megawatts for a Reserve Zone in an hour is less than 
that Market Participant’s Forward Reserve Obligation for that Reserve Zone in that hour.  Under these 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
circumstances the Market Participant pays a penalty based upon the Forward Reserve Failure-to-Reserve 
Penalty Rate and that Market Participant’s Forward Reserve Failure-to-Reserve Megawatts. 
 
Forward Reserve Failure-to-Reserve Megawatts are calculated in accordance with Section III.9.7.1(a) 
of Market Rule 1.  
 
Forward Reserve Failure-to-Reserve Penalty is the penalty associated with a Market Participant’s 
failure to reserve Forward Reserve and is defined in Section III.9.7.1 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Forward Reserve Failure-to-Reserve Penalty Rate is specified in Section III.9.7.1(b)(ii) of Market 
Rule 1.  
 
Forward Reserve Fuel Index is the index or set of indices used to calculate the Forward Reserve 
Threshold Price as defined in Section III.9.6.2 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Forward Reserve Heat Rate is the heat rate as defined in Section III.9.6.2 of Market Rule 1 that is used 
to calculate the Forward Reserve Threshold Price.  
 
Forward Reserve Market is a market for forward procurement of two reserve products, Ten-Minute 
Non-Spinning Reserve (TMNSR) and Thirty-Minute Operating Reserve (TMOR). 
 
Forward Reserve MWs are those megawatts assigned to specific eligible Forward Reserve Resources 
which convert a Forward Reserve Obligation into a Resource-specific obligation. 
 
Forward Reserve Obligation is a Market Participant’s amount, in megawatts, of Forward Reserve that 
cleared in the Forward Reserve Auction and adjusted, as applicable, to account for bilateral transactions 
that transfer Forward Reserve Obligations.   
 
Forward Reserve Obligation Charge is defined in Section III.10.4 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Forward Reserve Offer Cap is $7,100/megawatt-month.   
 
Forward Reserve Payment Rate is defined in Section III.9.8 of Market Rule 1.   
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Forward Reserve Procurement Period is defined in Section III.9.1 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Forward Reserve Qualifying Megawatts refer to all or a portion of a Forward Reserve Resource’s 
capability offered into the Real-Time Energy Market at energy offer prices above the applicable Forward 
Reserve Threshold Price that are calculated in accordance with Section III.9.6.4 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Forward Reserve Resource is a Resource that meets the eligibility requirements defined in Section 
III.9.5.2 of Market Rule 1 that has been assigned Forward Reserve Obligation by a Market Participant.  
 
Forward Reserve Threshold Price is the minimum price at which assigned Forward Reserve Megawatts 
are required to be offered into the Real-Time Energy Market as calculated in Section III.9.6.2 of Market 
Rule 1.  
 
FTR Auction is the periodic auction of FTRs conducted by the ISO in accordance with Section III.7 of 
Market Rule 1.  
 
FTR Auction Revenue is the revenue collected from the sale of FTRs in FTR Auctions.  FTR Auction 
Revenue is payable to FTR Holders who submit their FTRs for sale in the FTR Auction in accordance 
with Section III.7 of Market Rule 1 and to ARR Holders and Incremental ARR Holders in accordance 
with Appendix C of Market Rule 1.  
 
FTR Credit Test Percentage is calculated in accordance with Section III.B.1(b) of the ISO New 
England Financial Assurance Policy. 
 
FTR Financial Assurance Requirements are described in Section VI of the ISO New England Financial 
Assurance Policy. 
 
FTR Holder is an entity that acquires an FTR through the FTR Auction to Section III.7 of Market Rule 1 
and registers with the ISO as the holder of the FTR in accordance with Section III.7 of Market Rule 1 and 
applicable ISO New England Manuals.  
 
FTR-Only Customer is a Market Participant that transacts in the FTR Auction and that does not 
participate in other markets or programs of the New England Markets.  References in this Tariff to a 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
“Non-Market Participant FTR Customers” and similar phrases shall be deemed references to an FTR-
Only Customer.  
 
FTR Settlement Risk Financial Assurance is an amount of financial assurance required by a 
Designated FTR Participant for each bid submission into an FTR Auction and for each bid awarded to the 
individual participant in an FTR Auction.  This amount is calculated pursuant to Section VI.A of the ISO 
New England Financial Assurance Policy. 
 
GADS Data means data submitted to the NERC for collection into the NERC’s Generating Availability 
Data System (GADS).  
 
Gap Request for Proposals (Gap RFP) is defined in Section III.11 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Gas Day means a period of 24 consecutive hours beginning at 0900 hrs Central Time. 
 
Generating Capacity Resource means a New Generating Capacity Resource or an Existing Generating 
Capacity Resource.  
 
Generator Asset is a device (or a collection of devices) that is capable of injecting real power onto the 
grid that has been registered as a Generator Asset in accordance with the Asset Registration Process.  
 
Generator Imbalance Service is the form of Ancillary Service described in Schedule 10 of the OATT. 
 
Generator Interconnection Related Upgrade is an addition to or modification of the New England 
Transmission System (pursuant to Section II.47.1, Schedule 22 or Schedule 23 of the OATT) to effect the 
interconnection of a new generating unit or an existing generating unit whose energy capability or 
capacity capability is being materially changed and increased whether or not the interconnection is being 
effected to meet the Capacity Capability Interconnection Standard or the Network Capability 
Interconnection Standard.  As to Category A Projects (as defined in Schedule 11 of the OATT), a 
Generator Interconnection Related Upgrade also includes an upgrade beyond that required to satisfy the 
Network Capability Interconnection Standard (or its predecessor) for which the Generator Owner has 
committed to pay prior to October 29, 1998.  
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Generator Owner is the owner, in whole or part, of a generating unit whether located within or outside 
the New England Control Area.  
 
Good Utility Practice means any of the practices, methods and acts engaged in or approved by a 
significant portion of the electric utility industry during the relevant time period, or any of the practices, 
methods and acts which, in the exercise of reasonable judgment in light of the facts known at the time the 
decision was made, could have been expected to accomplish the desired result at a reasonable cost 
consistent with good business practices, reliability, safety and expedition. Good Utility Practice is not 
intended to be limited to the optimum practice, method, or act to the exclusion of all others, but rather 
includes all acceptable practices, methods, or acts generally accepted in the region, including those 
practices required by Federal Power Act Section 215(a)(4).  
 
Governance Only Member is defined in Section 1 of the Participants Agreement. 
 
Governance Participant is defined in the Participants Agreement.  
 
Governing Documents, for the purposes of the ISO New England Billing Policy, are the Transmission, 
Markets and Services Tariff and ISO Participants Agreement. 
 
Governing Rating is the lowest corporate rating from any Rating Agency for that Market Participant, or, 
if the Market Participant has no corporate rating, then the lowest rating from any Rating Agency for that 
Market Participant’s senior unsecured debt. 
 
Grandfathered Agreements (GAs) is a transaction specified in Section II.45 for the applicable period 
specified in that Section.  
 
Grandfathered Intertie Agreement (GIA) is defined pursuant to the TOA. 
 
Handy-Whitman Index of Public Utility Construction Costs is the Total Other Production Plant index 
shown in the Cost Trends of Electric Utility Construction for the North Atlantic Region as published in 
the Handy-Whitman Index of Public Utility Construction Costs. 
 
Highgate Transmission Facilities (HTF) are existing U. S.-based transmission facilities covered under 
the Agreement for Joint Ownership, Construction and Operation of the Highgate Transmission 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Interconnection dated as of August 1, 1984 including (1) the whole of a 200 megawatt high-voltage, back-
to-back, direct-current converter facility located in Highgate, Vermont and (2) a 345 kilovolt transmission 
line within Highgate and Franklin, Vermont (which connects the converter facility at the U.S.-Canadian 
border to a Hydro-Quebec 120 kilovolt line in Bedford, Quebec). The HTF include any upgrades 
associated with increasing the capacity or changing the physical characteristics of these facilities as 
defined in the above stated agreement dated August 1, 1984 until the Operations Date, as defined in the 
TOA.  The current HTF rating is a nominal 225 MW.  The HTF are not defined as PTF.  Coincident with 
the Operations Date and except as stipulated in Schedules, 9, 12, and Attachment F to the OATT, HTF 
shall be treated in the same manner as PTF for purposes of the OATT and all references to PTF in the 
OATT shall be deemed to apply to HTF as well.  The treatment of the HTF is not intended to establish 
any binding precedent or presumption with regard to the treatment for other transmission facilities within 
the New England Transmission System (including HVDC, MTF, or Control Area Interties) for purposes 
of the OATT.  
 
Host Participant or Host Utility is a Market Participant or a Governance Participant transmission or 
distribution provider that reconciles the loads within the metering domain with OP-18 compliant 
metering.  
 
Hourly Charges are defined in Section 1.3 of the ISO New England Billing Policy. 
 
Hourly Requirements are determined in accordance with Section III.A(i) of the ISO New England 
Financial Assurance Policy. 
 
Hourly Shortfall NCPC Credit is an NCPC Credit calculated pursuant to Appendix F to Market Rule 1. 
 
Hub is a specific set of pre-defined Nodes for which a Locational Marginal Price will be calculated for 
the Day-Ahead Energy Market and Real-Time Energy Market and which can be used to establish a 
reference price for energy purchases and the transfer of Day-Ahead Adjusted Load Obligations and Real-
Time Adjusted Load Obligations and for the designation of FTRs.  
 
Hub Price is calculated in accordance with Section III.2.8 of Market Rule 1.  
 
HQ Interconnection Capability Credit (HQICC) is a monthly value reflective of the annual installed 
capacity benefits of the Phase I/II HVDC-TF, as determined by the ISO, using a standard methodology on 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
file with the Commission, in conjunction with the setting of the Installed Capacity Requirement. An 
appropriate share of the HQICC shall be assigned to an IRH if the Phase I/II HVDC-TF support costs are 
paid by that IRH and such costs are not included in the calculation of the Regional Network Service rate.  
The share of HQICC allocated to such an eligible IRH for a month is the sum in kilowatts of (1)(a) the 
IRH’s percentage share, if any, of the Phase I Transfer Capability times (b) the Phase I Transfer Credit, 
plus (2)(a) the IRH’s percentage share, if any, of the Phase II Transfer Capability, times (b) the Phase II 
Transfer Credit.  The ISO shall establish appropriate HQICCs to apply for an IRH which has such a 
percentage share.  
 
Import Capacity Resource means an Existing Import Capacity Resource or a New Import Capacity 
Resource offered to provide capacity in the New England Control Area from an external Control Area.  
 
Inadvertent Energy Revenue is defined in Section III.3.2.1(o) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Inadvertent Energy Revenue Charges or Credits is defined in Section III.3.2.1(p) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Inadvertent Interchange means the difference between net actual energy flow and net scheduled energy 
flow into or out of the New England Control Area.  
 
Increment Offer means an offer to sell energy at a specified Location in the Day-Ahead Energy Market 
which is not associated with a physical supply.  An accepted Increment Offer results in scheduled supply 
at the specified Location in the Day-Ahead Energy Market.  
 
Incremental ARR is an ARR provided in recognition of a participant-funded transmission system 
upgrade pursuant to Appendix C of this Market Rule. 
 
Incremental ARR Holder is an entity which is the record holder of an Incremental Auction Revenue 
Right in the register maintained by the ISO. 
 
Incremental Cost of Reliability Service is described in Section III.13.2.5.2.5.2 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Independent Transmission Company (ITC) is a transmission entity that assumes certain 
responsibilities in accordance with Section 10.05 of the Transmission Operating Agreement and 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Attachment M to the OATT, subject to the acceptance or approval of the Commission and a finding of the 
Commission that the transmission entity satisfies applicable independence requirements. 
 
Information Request is a request from a potential Disputing Party submitted in writing to the ISO for 
access to Confidential Information. 
 
Initial Market Participant Financial Assurance Requirement is calculated for new Market 
Participants and Returning Market Participants, other than an FTR-Only Customer or a Governance Only 
Member, according to Section IV of the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy. 
 
Installed Capacity Requirement means the level of capacity required to meet the reliability 
requirements defined for the New England Control Area, as described in Section III.12 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Interchange Transactions are transactions deemed to be effected under Market Rule 1.  
 
Interconnecting Transmission Owner has the meaning specified in Section I of Schedule 22,  
Attachment 1 to Schedule 23, and Section I of Schedule 25 of the OATT. 
 
Interconnection Agreement is the “Large Generator Interconnection Agreement”, the “Small Generator 
Interconnection Agreement”, or the “Elective Transmission Upgrade Interconnection Agreement” 
pursuant to Schedules 22, 23 or 25 of the ISO OATT or an interconnection agreement approved by the 
Commission prior to the adoption of the Interconnection Procedures.  
 
Interconnection Customer has the meaning specified in Section I of Schedule 22, Attachment 1 to 
Schedule 23, and Section I of Schedule 25 of the OATT. 
 
Interconnection Procedure is the “Large Generator Interconnection Procedures,” the “Small Generator 
Interconnection Procedures,” or the “Elective Transmission Upgrade Interconnection Procedures” 
pursuant to Schedules 22, 23, and 25 of the ISO OATT.  
 
Interconnection Reliability Operating Limit (IROL) has the meaning specified in the Glossary of 
Terms Used in NERC Reliability Standards. 
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Interconnection Request has the meaning specified in Section I of Schedule 22, Attachment 1 to 
Schedule 23, or Section I of Schedule 25 of the OATT. 
 
Interconnection Rights Holder(s) (IRH) has the meaning given to it in Schedule 20A to Section II of 
this Tariff.   
 
Interest is interest calculated in the manner specified in Section II.8.3.  
 
Interface Bid is a unified real-time bid to simultaneously purchase and sell energy on each side of an 
external interface for which the enhanced scheduling procedures in Section III.1.10.7.A are implemented. 
 
Intermittent Power Resource is a wind, solar, run of river hydro or other renewable resource or an 
aggregation of wind, solar, run of river hydro and other renewable resources that does not have control 
over its net power output.  
 
Internal Bilateral for Load is an internal bilateral transaction under which the buyer receives a reduction 
in Real-Time Load Obligation and the seller receives a corresponding increase in Real-Time Load 
Obligation in the amount of the sale, in MWs.  An Internal Bilateral for Load transaction is only 
applicable in the Real-Time Energy Market.  
 
Internal Bilateral for Market for Energy is an internal bilateral transaction for Energy which applies in 
the Day-Ahead Energy Market and Real-Time Energy Market or just the Real-Time Energy Market under 
which the buyer receives a reduction in Day-Ahead Adjusted Load Obligation and Real-Time Adjusted 
Load Obligation and the seller receives a corresponding increase in Day-Ahead Adjusted Load Obligation 
and Real-Time Adjusted Load Obligation in the amount of the sale, in MWs.  
 
Internal Elective Transmission Upgrade (Internal ETU) is defined in Section I of Schedule 25 of the 
OATT. 
 
Internal Market Monitor means the department of the ISO responsible for carrying out the market 
monitoring and mitigation functions specified in Appendix A and elsewhere in Market Rule 1.  
 
Interregional Planning Stakeholder Advisory Committee (IPSAC) is the committee described as such 
in the Northeast Planning Protocol. 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Interregional Transmission Project is a transmission project located within the New England Control 
Area and one or more of the neighboring transmission planning regions. 
 
Interruption Cost is the amount, in dollars, that must be paid to a Market Participant each time the 
Market Participant’s Demand Response Resource is scheduled or dispatched in the New England Markets 
to reduce demand.  
 
Inventoried Energy Day is an Operating Day that occurs in the months of December, January, or 
February during the winters of 2023-2024 and 2024-2025 (inventoried energy program) and for which the 
average of the high temperature and the low temperature on that Operating Day, as measured and reported 
by the National Weather Service at Bradley International Airport in Windsor Locks, Connecticut, is less 
than or equal to 17 degrees Fahrenheit, as described in Section III.K.3.1 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Investment Grade Rating, for a Market (other than an FTR-Only Customer) or Non-Market Participant 
Transmission Customer, is either (a) a corporate investment grade rating from one or more of the Rating 
Agencies, or (b) if the Market Participant or Non-Market Participant Transmission Customer does not 
have a corporate rating from one of the Rating Agencies, then an investment grade rating for the Market 
Participant’s or Non-Market Participant Transmission Customer’s senior unsecured debt from one or 
more of the Rating Agencies. 
 
Invoice is a statement issued by the ISO for the net Charge owed by a Covered Entity pursuant to the ISO 
New England Billing Policy.  
 
Invoice Date is the day on which the ISO issues an Invoice. 
 
ISO means ISO New England Inc. 
 
ISO Charges, for the purposes of the ISO New England Billing Policy, are both Non-Hourly Charges 
and Hourly Charges. 
 
ISO Control Center is the primary control center established by the ISO for the exercise of its Operating 
Authority and the performance of functions as an RTO.  
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
ISO-Initiated Claimed Capability Audit is the audit performed pursuant to Section III.1.5.1.4. 
 
ISO New England Administrative Procedures means procedures adopted by the ISO to fulfill its 
responsibilities to apply and implement ISO New England System Rules.  
 
ISO New England Billing Policy is Exhibit ID to Section I of the Transmission, Markets and Services 
Tariff.  
 
ISO New England Filed Documents means the Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff, including 
but not limited to Market Rule 1, the Participants Agreement, the Transmission Operating Agreement or 
other documents that affect the rates, terms and conditions of service.  
 
ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy is Exhibit IA to Section I of the Transmission, Markets 
and Services Tariff.  
 
ISO New England Information Policy is the policy establishing guidelines regarding the information 
received, created and distributed by Market Participants and the ISO in connection with the settlement, 
operation and planning of the System, as the same may be amended from time to time in accordance with 
the provisions of this Tariff.  The ISO New England Information Policy is Attachment D to the 
Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff.  
 
ISO New England Manuals are the manuals implementing Market Rule 1, as amended from time to time 
in accordance with the Participants Agreement.  Any elements of the ISO New England Manuals that 
substantially affect rates, terms, and/or conditions of service shall be filed with the Commission under 
Section 205 of the Federal Power Act.  
 
ISO New England Operating Documents are the Tariff and the ISO New England Operating 
Procedures.  
 
ISO New England Operating Procedures (OPs) are the ISO New England Planning Procedures and the 
operating guides, manuals, procedures and protocols developed and utilized by the ISO for operating the 
ISO bulk power system and the New England Markets.  
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
ISO New England Planning Procedures are the procedures developed and utilized by the ISO for 
planning the ISO bulk power system.  
 
ISO New England System Rules are Market Rule 1, the ISO New England Information Policy, the ISO 
New England Administrative Procedures, the ISO New England Manuals and any other system rules, 
procedures or criteria for the operation of the New England Transmission System and administration of 
the New England Markets and the Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff.  
 
ITC Agreement is defined in Attachment M to the OATT. 
 
ITC Rate Schedule is defined in Section 3.1 of Attachment M to the OATT.  
 
ITC System is defined in Section 2.2 of Attachment M to the OATT.  
 
ITC System Planning Procedures is defined in Section 15.4 of Attachment M to the OATT.  
 
Joint ISO/RTO Planning Committee (JIPC) is the committee described as such in the Northeastern 
Planning Protocol. 
 
Late Payment Account is a segregated interest-bearing account into which the ISO deposits Late 
Payment Charges due from ISO Charges and interest owed from participants for late payments that are 
collected and not distributed to the Covered Entities, until the Late Payment Account Limit is reached, 
under the ISO New England Billing Policy and penalties collected under the ISO New England Financial 
Assurance Policy. 
 
Late Payment Account Limit is defined in Section 4.2 of the ISO New England Billing Policy. 
 
Late Payment Charge is defined in Section 4.1 of the ISO New England Billing Policy. 
 
 
Lead Market Participant, for purposes other than the Forward Capacity Market, is the entity authorized 
to submit Supply Offers, Demand Bids, Demand Reduction Offers or Baseline Deviation Offers for a 
Resource and to whom certain Energy TUs are assessed under Schedule 2 of Section IV.A of the Tariff.  
For purposes of the Forward Capacity Market, the Lead Market Participant is the entity designated to 
participate in that market on behalf of an Existing Capacity Resource or a New Capacity Resource. 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Limited Energy Resource means a Generator Asset that, due to design considerations, environmental 
restriction on operations, cyclical requirements, such as the need to recharge or refill or manage water 
flow, or fuel limitations, are unable to operate continuously at full output on a daily basis.  
 
Load Asset means a physical load that has been registered in accordance with the Asset Registration 
Process. A Load Asset can be an Asset Related Demand, including a Dispatchable Asset Related 
Demand. 
 
Load Management means measures (e.g., products, equipment, systems, services, practices and/or 
strategies) on end-use customer facilities that curtail electrical usage or shift electrical usage while 
delivering a comparable or acceptable level of end-use service.  Such measures include, but are not 
limited to, energy management systems, load control end-use cycling, load curtailment strategies, and 
energy storage that curtails or shifts electrical usage by means other than generating electricity.  
 
Load Shedding is the systematic reduction of system demand by temporarily decreasing load.  
 
Load-Side Relationship Certification is a certification described in Section III.A.21.1.3 that a Project 
Sponsor submits as part of the New Capacity Qualification Package, New Demand Capacity Resource 
Qualification Package, or New Distributed Energy Capacity Resource Qualification Package to 
demonstrate that the New Capacity Resource should not be subject to buyer-side market power review. 
 
Load Zone is a Reliability Region, except as otherwise provided for in Section III.2.7 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Local Area Facilities are defined in the TOA. 
 
Local Benefit Upgrade(s) (LBU) is an upgrade, modification or addition to the transmission system that 
is:  (i) rated below 115kV or (ii) rated 115kV or above and does not meet all of the non-voltage criteria 
for PTF classification specified in the OATT.  
 
Local Control Centers are those control centers in existence as of the effective date of the OATT 
(including the CONVEX, REMVEC, Maine and New Hampshire control centers) or established by the 
PTOs in accordance with the TOA that are separate from the ISO Control Center and perform certain 
functions in accordance with the OATT and the TOA.  
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Local Delivery Service is the service of delivering electric energy to end users.  This service is subject to 
state jurisdiction regardless of whether such service is provided over local distribution or transmission 
facilities.  An entity that is an Eligible Customer under the OATT is not excused from any requirements 
of state law, or any order or regulation issued pursuant to state law, to arrange for Local Delivery Service 
with the Participating Transmission Owner and/or distribution company providing such service and to pay 
all applicable charges associated with such service, including charges for stranded costs and benefits.  
 
Local Longer-Term Transmission Upgrade is any addition, modification, and/or upgrade to the New 
England Transmission System with a voltage level below 115 kV that is required in connection with the 
construction of a Longer-Term Transmission Upgrade approved for inclusion in the Regional System 
Plan pursuant to Section 16 of Attachment K to the OATT. 
 
Local Network is defined as the transmission facilities constituting a local network as identified in 
Attachment E, as such Attachment may be modified from time to time in accordance with the 
Transmission Operating Agreement.  
 
Local Network Load is the load that a Network Customer designates for Local Network Service under 
Schedule 21 to the OATT.  
 
Local Network RNS Rate is the rate applicable to Regional Network Service to effect a delivery to load 
in a particular Local Network, as determined in accordance with Schedule 9 to the OATT.  
 
Local Network Service (LNS) is the network service provided under Schedule 21 and the Local Service 
Schedules to permit the Transmission Customer to efficiently and economically utilize its resources to 
serve its load.  
 
Local Point-To-Point Service (LPTP) is Point-to-Point Service provided under Schedule 21 of the 
OATT and the Local Service Schedules to permit deliveries to or from an interconnection point on the 
PTF.  
 
Local Public Policy Transmission Upgrade is any addition and/or upgrade to the New England 
Transmission System with a voltage level below 115 kV that is required in connection with the 
construction of a Public Policy Transmission Upgrade approved for inclusion in the Regional System 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Plan pursuant to Attachment K to the ISO OATT or included in a Local System Plan in accordance with 
Appendix 1 to Attachment K. 
 
Local Resource Adequacy Requirement is calculated pursuant to Section III.12.2.1.1. 
 
Local Second Contingency Protection Resources are those Resources identified by the ISO on a daily 
basis as necessary for the provision of Operating Reserve requirements and adherence to NERC, NPCC 
and ISO reliability criteria over and above those Resources required to meet first contingency reliability 
criteria within a Reliability Region.  
 
Local Service is transmission service provided under Schedule 21 and the Local Service Schedules 
thereto.  
 
Local Service Schedule is a PTO-specific schedule to the OATT setting forth the rates, charges, terms 
and conditions applicable to Local Service.  
 
Local Sourcing Requirement (LSR) is a value calculated as described in Section III.12.2.1 of Market 
Rule 1.  
 
Local System Planning (LSP) is the process defined in Appendix 1 of Attachment K to the OATT.  
 
Localized Costs are costs that the ISO, with advisory input from the Reliability Committee, determines in 
accordance with Schedule 12C of the OATT shall not be included in the Pool-Supported PTF costs 
recoverable under this OATT, or in costs allocated to Regional Network Load according to Section 6 and 
Section 10 of Schedule 12.  If there are any Localized Costs, the ISO shall identify them in the Regional 
System Plan.  
 
Location is a Node, External Node, Load Zone, DRR Aggregation Zone, or Hub. 
 
Locational Marginal Price (LMP) is defined in Section III.2 of Market Rule 1.  The Locational 
Marginal Price for a Node is the nodal price at that Node; the Locational Marginal Price for an External 
Node is the nodal price at that External Node; the Locational Marginal Price for a Load Zone, DRR 
Aggregation Zone or Reliability Region is the Zonal Price for that Load Zone, DRR Aggregation Zone or 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Reliability Region, respectively; and the Locational Marginal Price for a Hub is the Hub Price for that 
Hub. 
 
Long-Term is a term of one year or more.  
 
Long-Term Transmission Outage is a long-term transmission outage scheduled in accordance with ISO 
New England Operating Procedure No. 3. 
 
Longer-Term Proposal is a proposal submitted by a Qualified Transmission Project Sponsor pursuant to 
Section 16.4(b) of Attachment K to the OATT. 
 
Longer-Term Transmission Solution is the Longer-Term Proposal identified as the preferred solution 
pursuant to Section 16 of Attachment K to the OATT. 
 
Longer-Term Transmission Study is a study conducted by the ISO pursuant to the process set out in 
Section 16 of Attachment K of the OATT.  The 2050 Transmission Study shall be the first Longer-Term 
Transmission Study.  
 
Longer-Term Transmission Upgrade is an addition, modification, and/or upgrade to the New England 
Transmission System that meets the voltage and non-voltage criteria for Longer-Term Transmission 
Upgrade PTF classification specified in the OATT and has been included in the Regional System Plan 
and RSP Project List as a Longer-Term Transmission Upgrade pursuant to the procedures described in 
Section 16 of Attachment K of the OATT. 
Loss Component is the component of the nodal LMP at a given Node or External Node on the PTF that 
reflects the cost of losses at that Node or External Node relative to the reference point.  The Loss 
Component of the nodal LMP at a given Node on the non-PTF system reflects the relative cost of losses 
at that Node adjusted as required to account for losses on the non-PTF system already accounted for 
through tariffs associated with the non-PTF.  When used in connection with Hub Price or Zonal Price, the 
term Loss Component refers to the Loss Components of the nodal LMPs that comprise the Hub Price or 
Zonal Price, which Loss Components are averaged or weighted in the same way that nodal LMPs are 
averaged to determine Hub Price or weighted to determine Zonal Price.  
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Loss of Load Expectation (LOLE) is the probability of disconnecting non-interruptible customers due to 
a resource deficiency.  
 
Lost Opportunity Cost (LOC) is one of four forms of compensation that may be paid to resources 
providing VAR Service under Schedule 2 of the OATT. 
 
LSE means load serving entity. 
 
Lump Sum Blackstart Payment is defined and calculated as specified in Section 5.4 of Schedule 16 to 
the OATT. 
 
Lump Sum Blackstart Capital Payment is defined and calculated as specified in Section 5.4 of 
Schedule 16 to the OATT. 
 
Manual Response Rate is the rate, in MW/Minute, at which the output of a Generator Asset, or the 
consumption of a Dispatchable Asset Related Demand, is capable of changing. 
 
Marginal Loss Revenue Load Obligation is defined in Section III.3.2.1(b) of Market Rule 1. 
 
Marginal Reliability Impact is the change, with respect to an increment of capacity supply, in expected 
unserved energy due to resource deficiency, as measured in hours per year.   
 
Market Credit Limit is a credit limit for a Market Participant’s Financial Assurance Obligations (except 
FTR Financial Assurance Requirements) established for each Market Participant in accordance with 
Section II.C of the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy. 
 
Market Credit Test Percentage is calculated in accordance with Section III.B.1(a) of the ISO New 
England Financial Assurance Policy. 
 
Market Efficiency Needs Scenario is an Economic Study reference scenario that is described in Section 
17.2(b) of Attachment K to the OATT. 
 
Market Efficiency Transmission Upgrade is defined as those additions and upgrades that are not 
related to the interconnection of a generator, and, in the ISO’s determination, are designed to reduce bulk 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
power system costs to load system-wide, where the net present value of the reduction in bulk power 
system costs to load system-wide exceeds the net present value of the cost of the transmission addition or 
upgrade.  For purposes of this definition, the term “bulk power system costs to load system-wide” 
includes, but is not limited to, the costs of energy, capacity, reserves, losses and impacts on bilateral 
prices for electricity.  
 
Market Participant is a participant in the New England Markets (including a FTR-Only Customer) that 
has executed a Market Participant Service Agreement, or on whose behalf an unexecuted Market 
Participant Service Agreement has been filed with the Commission.   
 
Market Participant Financial Assurance Requirement is defined in Section III of the ISO New 
England Financial Assurance Policy. 
 
Market Participant Service Agreement (MPSA) is an agreement between the ISO and a Market 
Participant, in the form specified in Attachment A or Attachment A-1 to the Tariff, as applicable.  
 
Market Rule 1 is ISO Market Rule 1 and appendices set forth in Section III of this ISO New England 
Inc. Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff, as it may be amended from time to time.  
 
Market Violation is a tariff violation, violation of a Commission-approved order, rule or regulation, 
market manipulation, or inappropriate dispatch that creates substantial concerns regarding unnecessary 
market inefficiencies.  
 
Material Adverse Change is any change in financial status including, but not limited to a downgrade to 
below an Investment Grade Rating by any Rating Agency, being placed on credit watch with negative 
implication by any Rating Agency if the Market Participant or Non-Market Participant Transmission 
Customer does not have an Investment Grade Rating, a bankruptcy filing or other insolvency, a report of 
a significant quarterly loss or decline of earnings, the resignation of key officer(s), the sanctioning of the 
Market Participant or Non-Market Participant Transmission Customer or any of its Principles imposed by 
the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, the Securities Exchange Commission, any exchange 
monitored by the National Futures Association, or any state entity responsible for regulating activity in 
energy markets; the filing of a material lawsuit that could materially adversely impact current or future 
financial results; a significant change in the Market Participant’s or Non-Market Participant Transmission 
Customer’s credit default spreads; or a significant change in market capitalization.  
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Material Adverse Impact is defined, for purposes of review of ITC-proposed plans, as a proposed 
facility or project will be deemed to cause a “material adverse impact” on facilities outside of the ITC 
System if: (i) the proposed facility or project causes non-ITC facilities to exceed their capabilities or 
exceed their thermal, voltage or stability limits, consistent with all applicable reliability criteria, or (ii) the 
proposed facility or project would not satisfy the standards set forth in Section I.3.9 of the Transmission, 
Markets and Services Tariff.  This standard is intended to assure the continued service of all non-ITC firm 
load customers and the ability of the non-ITC systems to meet outstanding transmission service 
obligations.  
 
Maximum Capacity Limit is a value calculated as described in Section III.12.2.2 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Maximum Consumption Limit is the maximum amount, in MW, available for economic dispatch from 
a DARD and is based on the physical characteristics as submitted as part of the DARD’s Offer Data. A 
Market Participant must maintain an up-to-date Maximum Consumption Limit (and where applicable, 
must provide the ISO with any telemetry required by ISO New England Operating Procedure No. 18 to 
allow the ISO to maintain an updated Maximum Consumption Limit) for all hours in which a DARD has 
been offered into the Day-Ahead Energy Market or Real-Time Energy Market.   
 
Maximum Daily Energy Limit is the maximum amount of megawatt-hours that a Limited Energy 
Resource expects to be able to generate in the next Operating Day.  
 
Maximum Daily Consumption Limit is the maximum amount of megawatt-hours that a Storage DARD 
expects to be able to consume in the next Operating Day.  
 
Maximum Facility Load is the highest demand of an end-use customer facility since the start of the prior 
calendar year (or, if unavailable, an estimate thereof), where the demand evaluated is established by 
adding metered demand measured at the Retail Delivery Point and the output of all generators located 
behind the Retail Delivery Point in the same time intervals. 
 
Maximum Interruptible Capacity is an estimate of the maximum demand reduction and Net Supply 
that a Demand Response Asset can deliver, as measured at the Retail Delivery Point. 
 
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Maximum Load is the highest demand since the start of the prior calendar year (or, if unavailable, an 
estimate thereof), as measured at the Retail Delivery Point. 
 
Maximum Number of Daily Starts is the maximum number of times that a Binary Storage DARD or a 
Generator Asset can be started or that a Demand Response Resource can be interrupted in the next 
Operating Day under normal operating conditions.  
 
Maximum Reduction is the maximum available demand reduction, in MW, of a Demand Response 
Resource that a Market Participant offers to deliver in the Day-Ahead Energy Market or Real-Time 
Energy Market, as reflected in the Demand Response Resource’s Demand Reduction Offer. 
 
Measure Life is the estimated time an On-Peak Demand Resource or Seasonal Peak Demand Resource 
measure will remain in place, or the estimated time period over which the facility, structure, equipment or 
system in which a measure is installed continues to exist, whichever is shorter.  Suppliers of On-Peak 
Demand Resources or Seasonal Peak Demand Resources comprised of an aggregation of measures with 
varied Measures Lives shall determine and document the Measure Life either: (i) for each type of measure 
with a different Measure Life and adjust the aggregate performance based on the individual measure life 
calculation in the portfolio; or (ii) as the average Measure Life for the aggregated measures as long as the 
demand reduction capability of the resource is greater than or equal to the amount that cleared in the 
Forward Capacity Auction or reconfiguration auction for the entire Capacity Commitment Period, and the 
demand reduction capability for an Existing On-Peak Demand Resource or Existing Seasonal Peak 
Demand Resource is not over-stated in a subsequent Capacity Commitment Period. Measure Life shall be 
determined consistent with the resource’s Measurement and Verification Plan, which shall be reviewed by 
the ISO to ensure consistency with the measurement and verification requirements of Market Rule 1 and 
the ISO New England Manuals.  
 
Measurement and Verification Documents mean the measurement and verification documents 
described in Section 13.1.4.3.1 of Market Rule 1 that are submitted by On-Peak Demand Resources and 
Seasonal Peak Demand Resources, which include Measurement and Verification Plans, Updated 
Measurement and Verification Plans, Measurement and Verification Summary Reports, and Measurement 
and Verification Reference Reports.  
 
Measurement and Verification Plan means the measurement and verification plan submitted by an On-
Peak Demand Resource or Seasonal Peak Demand Resource as part of the qualification process for the 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Forward Capacity Auction pursuant to the requirements of Section III.13.1.4.3 of Market Rule 1 and the 
ISO New England Manuals.  
 
Measurement and Verification Reference Reports are optional reports submitted by On-Peak Demand 
Resources or Seasonal Peak Demand Resources during the Capacity Commitment Period subject to the 
schedule in the Measurement and Verification Plan and consistent with the schedule and reporting 
standards set forth in the ISO New England Manuals. Measurement and Verification Reference Reports 
update the prospective demand reduction capability of the On-Peak Demand Resource or Seasonal Peak 
Demand Resource project based on measurement and verification studies performed during the Capacity 
Commitment Period.    
 
Measurement and Verification Summary Report is the monthly report submitted by an On-Peak 
Demand Resource or Seasonal Peak Demand Resource with the monthly settlement report for the 
Forward Capacity Market, which documents the total demand reduction capability for all On-Peak 
Demand Resources and Seasonal Peak Demand Resources in operation as of the end of the previous 
month.  
 
MEPCO Grandfathered Transmission Service Agreement (MGTSA) is a MEPCO long-term firm 
point-to-point transmission service agreement with a POR or POD at the New Brunswick border and a 
start date prior to June 1, 2007 where the holder has elected, by written notice delivered to MEPCO 
within five (5) days following the filing of the settlement agreement in Docket Nos. ER07-1289 and 
EL08-56 or by September 1, 2008 (whichever is later), MGTSA treatment as further described in Section 
II.45.1.  
 
Merchant Transmission Facilities (MTF) are the transmission facilities owned by MTOs, defined and 
classified as MTF pursuant to Schedule 18 of the OATT, over which the ISO shall exercise Operating 
Authority in accordance with the terms set forth in a MTOA or Attachment K to the OATT, rated 69 kV 
or above and required to allow energy from significant power sources to move freely on the New England 
Transmission System.  
 
Merchant Transmission Facilities Provider (MTF Provider) is an entity as defined in Schedule 18 of 
the OATT.  
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Merchant Transmission Facilities Service (MTF Service) is transmission service over MTF as 
provided for in Schedule 18 of the OATT.  
 
Merchant Transmission Operating Agreement (MTOA) is an agreement between the ISO and an 
MTO with respect to its MTF.  
 
Merchant Transmission Owner (MTO) is an owner of MTF.  
 
Meter Data Error means an error in meter data, including an error in Coincident Peak Contribution 
values, on an Invoice issued by the ISO after the completion of the Data Reconciliation Process as 
described in the ISO New England Manuals and in Section III.3.8 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Meter Data Error RBA Submission Limit means the date thirty 30 calendar days after the issuance of 
the Invoice containing the results of the Data Reconciliation Process as described in the ISO New 
England Manuals and in Section III.3.6 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Metered Quantity For Settlement is defined in Section III.3.2.1.1 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Minimum Consumption Limit is (a) the lowest consumption level, in MW, available for economic 
dispatch from a DARD and is based on the physical characteristics as submitted as part of the DARD’s 
Offer Data, and (b) for a DARD undergoing Facility and Equipment Testing or auditing, the level to 
which the DARD requests and is approved to operate or is directed to operate for purposes of completing 
the Facility and Equipment Testing or auditing.  
 
Minimum Down Time is the number of hours that must elapse after a Generator Asset or Storage DARD 
has been released for shutdown at or below its Economic Minimum Limit or Minimum Consumption 
Limit before the Generator Asset or Storage DARD can be brought online and be released for dispatch at 
its Economic Minimum Limit or Minimum Consumption Limit. 
 
Minimum Generation Emergency means an Emergency declared by the ISO in which the ISO 
anticipates requesting one or more Generator Assets to operate at or below Economic Minimum Limit in 
order to manage, alleviate, or end the Emergency.  
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Minimum Generation Emergency Credits are those Real-Time Dispatch NCPC Credits calculated 
pursuant to Appendix F of Market Rule 1 for resources within a reliability region that are dispatched 
during a period for which a Minimum Generation Emergency has been declared.  
 
Minimum Reduction is the minimum available demand reduction, in MW, of a Demand Response 
Resource that a Market Participant offers to deliver in the Day-Ahead Energy Market or Real-Time 
Energy Market, as reflected in the Demand Response Resource’s Demand Reduction Offer. 
 
Minimum Reduction Time is the minimum number of hours of demand reduction at or above the 
Minimum Reduction for which the ISO must dispatch a Demand Response Resource to reduce demand. 
 
Minimum Run Time is the number of hours that a Generator Asset must remain online after it has been 
scheduled to reach its Economic Minimum Limit before it can be released for shutdown from its 
Economic Minimum Limit or the number of hours that must elapse after a Storage DARD has been 
scheduled to consume at its Minimum Consumption Limit before it can be released for shutdown. 
 
Minimum Time Between Reductions is the number of hours that must elapse after a Demand Response 
Resource has received a Dispatch Instruction to stop reducing demand before the Demand Response 
Resource can achieve its Minimum Reduction after receiving a Dispatch Instruction to start reducing 
demand. 
 
Minimum Total Reserve Requirement, which does not include Replacement Reserve, is the combined 
amount of TMSR, TMNSR, and TMOR required system-wide as described in Section III.2.7A and ISO 
New England Operating Procedure No. 8. 
 
Monthly Blackstart Service Charge is the charge made to Transmission Customers pursuant to Section 
6 of Schedule 16 to the OATT.  
 
Monthly Capacity Payment is the Forward Capacity Market payment described in Section III.13.7.3 of 
Market Rule 1. 
 
Monthly Peak is defined in Section II.21.2 of the OATT.  
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Monthly Real-Time Demand Reduction Obligation is the absolute value of a Customer’s hourly Real-
Time Demand Reduction Obligation summed for all hours in a month, in MWhs. 
 
Monthly Real-Time Generation Obligation is the sum, for all hours in a month, at all Locations, of a 
Customer’s Real-Time Generation Obligation, in MWhs.  
 
Monthly Real-Time Load Obligation is the absolute value of a Customer’s hourly Real-Time Load 
Obligation summed for all hours in a month, in MWhs.  
 
Monthly Regional Network Load is defined in Section II.21.2 of the OATT. 
 
Monthly Statement is the first weekly Statement issued on a Monday after the ninth of a calendar month 
that includes both the Hourly Charges for the relevant billing period and Non-Hourly Charges for the 
immediately preceding calendar month. 
 
MRI Transition Period is the period specified in Section III.13.2.2.1. 
 
MUI is the market user interface. 
 
Municipal Market Participant is defined in Section II of the ISO New England Financial Assurance 
Policy. 
 
MW is megawatt.  
 
MWh is megawatt-hour.  
 
Native Load Customers are the wholesale and retail power customers of a Transmission Owner on 
whose behalf the Transmission Owner, by statute, franchise, regulatory requirement, or contract, has 
undertaken an obligation to construct and operate its system to meet the reliable electric needs of such 
customers.  
 
NCPC Charge means the charges to Market Participants calculated pursuant to Appendix F to Market 
Rule 1.  
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
NCPC Credit means the credits to Market Participants calculated pursuant to Appendix F to Market Rule 
1.  
 
Needs Assessment is defined in Section 4.1 of Attachment K to the OATT.  
 
NEMA, for purposes of Section III of the Tariff, is the Northeast Massachusetts Reliability Region.  
 
NEMA Contract is a contract described in Appendix C of Market Rule 1 and listed in Exhibit 1  
of Appendix C of Market Rule 1.  
 
NEMA Load Serving Entity (NEMA LSE) is a Transmission Customer or Congestion Paying LSE 
Entity that serves load within NEMA.  
 
NEMA or Northeast Massachusetts Upgrade, for purposes of Section II of the Tariff, is an addition to 
or modification of the PTF into or within the Northeast Massachusetts Reliability Region that was not, as 
of December 31, 1999, the subject of a System Impact Study or application filed pursuant to Section I.3.9 
of the Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff; that is not related to generation interconnections; and 
that will be completed and placed in service by June 30, 2004. Such upgrades include, but are not limited 
to, new transmission facilities and related equipment and/or modifications to existing transmission 
facilities and related equipment.  The list of NEMA Upgrades is contained in Schedule 12A of the OATT.  
 
NEPOOL is the New England Power Pool, and the entities that collectively participated in the New 
England Power Pool.  
 
NEPOOL Agreement is the agreement among the participants in NEPOOL.  
 
NEPOOL GIS is the generation information system. 
 
NEPOOL GIS Administrator is the entity or entities that develop, administer, operate and maintain the 
NEPOOL GIS. 
 
NEPOOL GIS API Fees are the one-time on-boarding fees and annual maintenance fees charged to 
NEPOOL by the NEPOOL GIS Administrator for each NEPOOL Participant or Market Participant that 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
accesses the NEPOOL GIS through an application programming interface pursuant to Rule 3.9(b) of the 
operating rules of the NEPOOL GIS. 
 
NEPOOL Participant is a party to the NEPOOL Agreement. 
 
NERC is the North American Electric Reliability Corporation or its successor organization. 
 
NESCOE is the New England States Committee on Electricity, recognized by the Commission as the 
regional state committee for the New England Control Area. 
 
Net Commitment Period Compensation (NCPC) is the compensation methodology for Resources that 
is described in Appendix F to Market Rule 1.  
 
Net CONE is an estimate of the Cost of New Entry, net of non-capacity market revenues, for a reference 
technology resource type and is intended to equal the amount of capacity revenue the reference 
technology resource would require to be economically viable given reasonable expectations of the energy 
and ancillary services revenues under long-term equilibrium conditions.  
 
Net Regional Clearing Price is described in Section III.13.7.5 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Net Supply is energy injected into the transmission or distribution system at a Retail Delivery Point. 
 
Net Supply Capability is the maximum Net Supply a facility is physically and contractually able to 
inject into the transmission or distribution system at its Retail Delivery Point. 
 
Network Capability Interconnection Standard has the meaning specified in Section I of Schedule 22, 
Attachment 1 to Schedule 23, and Section I of Schedule 25 of the OATT.  
 
Network Customer is a Transmission Customer receiving RNS or LNS.  
 
Network Import Capability (NI Capability) is defined in Section I of Schedule 25 of the OATT. 
 
Network Import Interconnection Service (NI Interconnection Service) is defined in Section I of 
Schedule 25 of the OATT. 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Network Resource is defined as follows: (1) With respect to Market Participants, (a) any generating 
resource located in the New England Control Area which has been placed in service prior to the 
Compliance Effective Date (including a unit that has lost its capacity value when its capacity value is 
restored and a deactivated unit which may be reactivated without satisfying the requirements of Section 
II.46 of the OATT in accordance with the provisions thereof) until retired; (b) any generating resource 
located in the New England Control Area which is placed in service after the Compliance Effective Date 
until retired, provided that (i) the Generator Owner has complied with the requirements of Sections II.46 
and II.47 and Schedules 22 and 23 of the OATT, and (ii) the output of the unit shall be limited in 
accordance with Sections II.46 and II.47 and Schedules 22 and 23, if required; and (c) any generating 
resource or combination of resources (including bilateral purchases) located outside the New England 
Control Area for so long as any Market Participant has an Ownership Share in the resource or resources 
which is being delivered to it in the New England Control Area to serve Regional Network Load located 
in the New England Control Area or other designated Regional Network Loads contemplated by Section 
II.18.3 of the OATT taking Regional Network Service. (2) With respect to Non-Market Participant 
Transmission Customers, any generating resource owned, purchased or leased by the Non-Market 
Participant Transmission Customer which it designates to serve Regional Network Load.  
 
Network Upgrades has the meaning specified in Section I of Schedule 22, Section 1 of 23, and Section I 
of 25 of the OATT. 
 
New Brunswick Security Energy is defined in Section III.3.2.6A of Market Rule 1. 
 
New Capacity Offer is an offer in the Forward Capacity Auction to provide capacity from a New 
Generating Capacity Resource, New Import Capacity Resource, New Demand Capacity Resource, or 
New Distributed Energy Capacity Resource.  
 
New Capacity Qualification Deadline is a deadline, specified in Section III.13.1.10 of Market Rule 1, 
for submission of certain qualification materials for the Forward Capacity Auction, as discussed in 
Section III.13.1 of Market Rule 1.  
 
New Capacity Qualification Package is information submitted by certain new resources prior to 
participation in the Forward Capacity Auction, as described in Section III.13.1 of Market Rule  
1.  
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
New Capacity Resource is a resource (i) that never previously received any payment as a capacity 
resource including any capacity payment pursuant to the market rules in effect prior to June 1, 2010 and 
that has not cleared in any previous Forward Capacity Auction; or (ii) that is otherwise eligible to 
participate in the Forward Capacity Auction as a New Capacity Resource.  
 
New Capacity Show of Interest Form is described in Section III.13.1.1.2.1 of Market Rule 1. 
 
New Capacity Show of Interest Submission Window is the period of time during which a Project 
Sponsor may submit a New Capacity Show of Interest Form, a New Demand Capacity Resource Show of 
Interest Form, or a New Distributed Energy Capacity Resource Show of Interest Form, as described in 
Section III.13.1.10 of Market Rule 1.  
 
New Demand Capacity Resource is a type of Demand Capacity Resource participating in the Forward 
Capacity Market, as defined in Section III.13.1.4.1 of Market Rule 1.  
 
New Demand Capacity Resource Qualification Package is the information that a Project Sponsor must 
submit, in accordance with Section III.13.1.4.1.1.2 of Market Rule 1, for each resource that it seeks to 
offer in the Forward Capacity Auction as a New Demand Capacity Resource.  
 
New Demand Capacity Resource Show of Interest Form is described in Section III.13.1.4.1.1.1 of 
Market Rule 1.  
 
New Distributed Energy Capacity Resource is a type of Distributed Energy Capacity Resource 
participating in the Forward Capacity Market, as defined in Section III.13.1.4A.1 of Market Rule 1.  
 
New Distributed Energy Capacity Resource Qualification Package is the information that a Project 
Sponsor must submit, in accordance with Section III.13.1.4A.1.1.2 of Market Rule 1, for each resource 
that it seeks to offer in the Forward Capacity Auction as a New Distributed Energy Capacity Resource.  
 
New Distributed Energy Capacity Resource Show of Interest Form is described in Section 
III.13.1.4A.1.1.1 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
New England Control Area is the Control Area for New England, which includes PTF, Non-PTF, MTF 
and OTF.  The New England Control Area covers Connecticut, Rhode Island, Massachusetts, New 
Hampshire, Vermont, and part of Maine (i.e., excluding the portions of Northern Maine and the northern 
portion of Eastern Maine which are in the Maritimes Control Area).  
 
New England Markets are markets or programs for the purchase of energy, capacity, ancillary services, 
demand response services or other related products or services (including Financial Transmission Rights) 
that are delivered through or useful to the operation of the New England Transmission System and that 
are administered by the ISO pursuant to rules, rates, or agreements on file from time to time with the 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.  
 
New England System Restoration Plan is the plan that is developed by ISO, in accordance with NERC 
Reliability Standards, NPCC regional criteria and standards, ISO New England Operating Documents and 
ISO operating agreements, to facilitate the restoration of the New England Transmission System 
following a partial or complete shutdown of the New England Transmission System. 
 
New England Transmission System is the system of transmission facilities, including PTF, Non-PTF, 
OTF and MTF, within the New England Control Area under the ISO’s operational jurisdiction.  
 
New Generating Capacity Resource is a type of resource participating in the Forward Capacity Market, 
as described in Section III.13.1.1.1 of Market Rule 1.  
 
New Import Capacity Resource is a type of resource participating in the Forward Capacity Market, as 
defined in Section III.13.1.3.4 of Market Rule 1.  
 
New Resource Offer Floor Price is defined in Section III.A.21.3. 
 
NMPTC means Non-Market Participant Transmission Customer. 
 
NMPTC Credit Threshold is described in Section V.A.2 of the ISO New England Financial Assurance 
Policy. 
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
NMPTC Financial Assurance Requirement is an amount of additional financial assurance for Non-
Market Participant Transmission Customers described in Section V.D of the ISO New England Financial 
Assurance Policy. 
 
Node is a point on the New England Transmission System at which LMPs are calculated.  
 
No-Load Fee is the amount, in dollars per hour, for a Generator Asset that must be paid to Market 
Participants with an Ownership Share in the Generator Asset for being scheduled in the New England 
Markets, in addition to the Start-Up Fee and price offered to supply energy, for each hour that the 
Generator Asset is scheduled in the New England Markets.  
 
Nominated Consumption Limit is the consumption level specified by the Market Participant for a 
Dispatchable Asset Related Demand as adjusted in accordance with the provisions of Section 
III.13.7.5.1.3.  
 
Non-Commercial Capacity is the capacity of a New Capacity Resource or an Existing Capacity 
Resource, or portion thereof, that has not achieved FCM Commercial Operation. 
 
Non-Commercial Capacity Cure Period is the time period described in Section VII.D of the ISO New 
England Financial Assurance Policy. 
 
Non-Commercial Capacity Financial Assurance Amount (Non-Commercial Capacity FA Amount) 
is the financial assurance amount held on Non-Commercial Capacity cleared in a Forward Capacity 
Auction as calculated in accordance with Section VII.B.2 of the ISO New England Financial Assurance 
Policy. 
 
Non-Designated Blackstart Resource Study Cost Payments are the study costs reimbursed under 
Section 5.3 of Schedule 16 of the OATT. 
 
Non-Dispatchable Resource is any Resource that does not meet the requirements to be a Dispatchable 
Resource. 
 
Non-Hourly Charges are defined in Section 1.3 of the ISO New England Billing Policy. 
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Non-Hourly Requirements are determined in accordance with Section III.A(ii) of the ISO New England 
Financial Assurance Policy, which is Exhibit 1A of Section I of the Tariff. 
 
Non-Incumbent Transmission Developer is a Qualified Transmission Project Sponsor that:  (i) is not 
currently a PTO; (ii) has a transmission project listed in the RSP Project List; and (iii) has executed a 
Non-Incumbent Transmission Developer Operating Agreement.  “Non-Incumbent Transmission 
Developer” also includes a PTO that proposes the development of a transmission facility not located 
within or connected to its existing electric system; however, because such a PTO is a party to the TOA, it 
is not required to enter into a Non-Incumbent Transmission Developer Operating Agreement. 
 
Non-Incumbent Transmission Developer Operating Agreement (or NTDOA) is an agreement 
between the ISO and a Non-Incumbent Transmission Developer in the form specified in Attachment O to 
the OATT that sets forth their respective rights and responsibilities to each other with regard to proposals 
for and construction of certain transmission facilities. 
 
Non-Market Participant is any entity that is not a Market Participant.  
 
Non-Market Participant Transmission Customer is any entity which is not a Market Participant but is 
a Transmission Customer.  
 
Non-Municipal Market Participant is defined in Section II of the ISO New England Financial 
Assurance Policy. 
 
 
Non-PTF Transmission Facilities (Non-PTF) are the transmission facilities owned by the PTOs that do 
not constitute PTF, OTF or MTF.  
 
Non-Qualifying means a Market Participant that is not a Credit Qualifying Market Participant. 
 
Notice of RBA is defined in Section 6.3.2 of the ISO New England Billing Policy. 
 
Notification Time is the time required for a Generator Asset to synchronize to the system from the time a 
startup Dispatch Instruction is received from the ISO.  
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Northeastern Planning Protocol is the Amended and Restated Northeastern ISO/RTO Planning 
Coordination Protocol on file with the Commission and posted on the ISO website at the following URL:  
www.iso-ne.com/static-assets/documents/2015/07/northeastern_protocol_dmeast.doc. 
 
NPCC is the Northeast Power Coordinating Council.  
 
Obligation Month means a time period of one calendar month for which capacity payments are issued 
and the costs associated with capacity payments are allocated.  
 
Offer Data means the scheduling, operations planning, dispatch, new Resource, and other data, including 
Generator Asset, Dispatchable Asset Related Demand, and Demand Response Resource operating limits 
based on physical characteristics, and information necessary to schedule and dispatch Generator Assets,  
Dispatchable Asset Related Demands, and Demand Response Resources for the provision or consumption 
of energy, the provision of other services, and the maintenance of the reliability and security of the 
transmission system in the New England Control Area, and specified for submission to the New England 
Markets for such purposes by the ISO.  
 
Offered CLAIM10 is a Supply Offer value or a Demand Reduction Offer value between 0 and the 
CLAIM10 of the resource that represents the amount of TMNSR available either from an off-line Fast 
Start Generator or from a Fast Start Demand Response Resource that has not been dispatched. 
 
Offered CLAIM30 is a Supply Offer value or a Demand Reduction Offer value between 0 and the 
CLAIM30 of the resource that represents the amount of TMOR available either from an off-line Fast Start 
Generator or from a Fast Start Demand Response Resource that has not been dispatched. 
 
On-Peak Demand Resource is a type of Demand Capacity Resource and means installed measures (e.g., 
products, equipment, systems, services, practices and/or strategies) on end-use customer facilities that 
reduce the total amount of electrical energy consumed during Demand Resource On-Peak Hours, while 
delivering a comparable or acceptable level of end-use service.  Such measures include Energy 
Efficiency, Load Management, and Distributed Generation.  
 
Open Access Same-Time Information System (OASIS) is the ISO information system and standards of 
conduct responding to requirements of 18 C.F.R. §37 of the Commission’s regulations and all additional 
requirements implemented by subsequent Commission orders dealing with OASIS.  
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Open Access Transmission Tariff (OATT) is Section II of the ISO New England Inc. Transmission, 
Markets and Services Tariff.  
 
Operating Authority is defined pursuant to a MTOA, an OTOA, the TOA or the OATT, as applicable.  
 
Operating Data means GADS Data, data equivalent to GADS Data, CARL Data, metered load data, or 
actual system failure occurrences data, all as described in the ISO New England Operating Procedures.  
 
Operating Day means the calendar day period beginning at midnight for which transactions on the New 
England Markets are scheduled.  
 
Operating Reserve means Ten-Minute Spinning Reserve (TMSR), Ten-Minute Non-Spinning Reserve 
(TMNSR) and Thirty-Minute Operating Reserve (TMOR).  
 
Operations Date is February 1, 2005.  
 
OTF Service is transmission service over OTF as provided for in Schedule 20.  
 
Other Transmission Facility (OTF) are the transmission facilities owned by Transmission Owners, 
defined and classified as OTF pursuant to Schedule 20, over which the ISO shall exercise Operating 
Authority in accordance with the terms set forth in the OTOA, rated 69 kV or above, and required to 
allow energy from significant power sources to move freely on the New England Transmission System.  
OTF classification shall be limited to the Phase I/II HVDC-TF.  
 
Other Transmission Operating Agreements (OTOA) is the agreement(s) between the ISO, an OTO 
and/or the associated service provider(s) with respect to an OTF, which includes the HVDC Transmission 
Operating Agreement and the Phase I/II HVDC-TF Transmission Service Administration Agreement.  
With respect to the Phase I/II HVDC-TF, the HVDC Transmission Operating Agreement covers the rights 
and responsibilities for the operation of the facility and the Phase I/II HVDC-TF Transmission Service 
Administration Agreement covers the rights and responsibilities for the administration of transmission 
service.  
 
Other Transmission Owner (OTO) is an owner of OTF.  
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Ownership Share is a right or obligation, for purposes of settlement, to a percentage share of all credits 
or charges associated with a Generator Asset or a Load Asset, where such facility is interconnected to the 
New England Transmission System.  
 
Participant Expenses are defined in Section 1 of the Participants Agreement. 
 
Participant Required Balance is defined in Section 5.3 of the ISO New England Billing Policy. 
 
Participant Vote is defined in Section 1 of the Participants Agreement. 
 
Participants Agreement is the agreement among the ISO, the New England Power Pool and Individual 
Participants, as amended from time to time, on file with the Commission.  
 
Participants Committee is the principal committee referred to in the Participants Agreement.  
 
Participating Transmission Owner (PTO) is a transmission owner that is a party to the TOA.  
 
Passive DR Audit is the audit performed pursuant to Section III.13.6.1.5.4. 
 
Passive DR Auditing Period is the summer Passive DR Auditing Period (June 1 to August 31) or winter 
Passive DR Auditing Period (December 1 to January 31) applicable to On-Peak Demand Resources and 
Seasonal Peak Demand Resources.  
 
Payment is a sum of money due to a Covered Entity from the ISO. 
 
Payment Default Shortfall Fund is defined in Section 5.1 of the ISO New England Billing Policy. 
 
Permanent De-list Bid is a bid that may be submitted by an Existing Generating Capacity Resource, 
Existing Import Capacity Resource, Existing Demand Capacity Resource, or Existing Distributed Energy 
Capacity Resource in the Forward Capacity Auction to permanently remove itself from the capacity 
market, as described in Section III.13.1.2.3.1.5 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Phase I Transfer Credit is 40% of the HQICC, or such other fraction of the HQICC as the ISO may 
establish.  
 
Phase I/II HVDC-TF is defined in Schedule 20A to Section II of this Tariff.  
 
Phase I/II HVDC-TF Transfer Capability is the transfer capacity of the Phase I/II HVDC-TF under 
normal operating conditions, as determined in accordance with Good Utility Practice. The “Phase I 
Transfer Capability” is the transfer capacity under normal operating conditions, as determined in 
accordance with Good Utility Practice, of the Phase I terminal facilities as determined initially as of the 
time immediately prior to Phase II of the Phase I/II HVDC-TF first being placed in service, and as 
adjusted thereafter only to take into account changes in the transfer capacity which are independent of any 
effect of Phase II on the operation of Phase I. The “Phase II Transfer Capability” is the difference 
between the Phase I/II HVDC-TF Transfer Capability and the Phase I Transfer Capability. 
Determinations of, and any adjustment in, Phase I/II HVDC-TF Transfer Capability shall be made by the 
ISO, and the basis for any such adjustment shall be explained in writing and posted on the ISO website.  
 
Phase One Proposal is a first round submission, as defined in Section 4.3 of Attachment K of the OATT, 
of a proposal for a Reliability Transmission Upgrade or Market Efficiency Transmission Upgrade, as 
applicable, by a Qualified Transmission Project Sponsor. 
 
Phase II Transfer Credit is 60% of the HQICC, or such other fraction of the HQICC as the ISO may 
establish.  
 
Phase Two Solution is a second round submission, as defined in Section 4.3 of Attachment K of the 
OATT, of a proposal for a Reliability Transmission Upgrade or Market Efficiency Transmission Upgrade 
by a Qualified Transmission Project Sponsor. 
 
Planning Advisory Committee is the committee described in Attachment K of the OATT.  
 
Planning and Reliability Criteria is defined in Section 3.3 of Attachment K to the OATT. 
 
Planning Authority is an entity defined as such by the North American Electric Reliability Corporation. 
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Point(s) of Delivery (POD) is point(s) of interconnection where capacity and/or energy transmitted by a 
Transmission Customer will be made available to the Receiving Party under the OATT.  
 
Point of Interconnection shall have the same meaning as that used for purposes of Schedules 22, 23 and 
25 of the OATT. 
 
Point(s) of Receipt (POR) is point(s) of interconnection where capacity and/or energy transmitted by a 
Transmission Customer will be made available by the Delivering Party under the OATT.  
 
Point-To-Point Service is the transmission of capacity and/or energy on either a firm or non-firm basis 
from the Point(s) of Receipt to the Point(s) of Delivery under the OATT pursuant to Local Point-To-Point 
Service or OTF Service or MTF Service; and the transmission of capacity and/or energy from the Point(s) 
of Receipt to the Point(s) of Delivery under the OATT pursuant to Through or Out Service.  
 
Policy Scenario is an Economic Study reference scenario that is described in Section 17.2(c) of 
Attachment K to the OATT. 
 
Pool-Planned Unit is one of the following units: New Haven Harbor Unit 1 (Coke Works), Mystic Unit 
7, Canal Unit 2, Potter Unit 2, Wyman Unit 4, Stony Brook Units 1, 1A, 1B, 1C, 2A and 2B, Millstone 
Unit 3, Seabrook Unit 1 and Waters River Unit 2 (to the extent of 7 megawatts of its Summer capability 
and 12 megawatts of its Winter capability).  
 
Pool PTF Rate is the transmission rate determined in accordance with Schedule 8 to the OATT.  
 
Pool RNS Rate is the transmission rate determined in accordance with paragraph (2) of Schedule 9 of 
Section II of the Tariff.  
 
Pool-Scheduled Resources are described in Section III.1.10.2 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Pool Supported PTF is defined as: (i) PTF first placed in service prior to January 1, 2000; (ii) Generator 
Interconnection Related Upgrades with respect to Category A and B projects (as defined in Schedule 11), 
but only to the extent not paid for by the interconnecting Generator Owner; and (iii) other PTF upgrades, 
but only to the extent the costs therefore are determined to be Pool Supported PTF in accordance with 
Schedule 12.  
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Pool Transmission Facility (PTF) means the transmission facilities owned by PTOs which meet the 
criteria specified in Section II.49 of the OATT.  
 
Posting Entity is any Market Participant or Non-Market Participant Transmission Customer providing 
financial security under the provisions of the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy. 
  
Posture means an action of the ISO to deviate from the jointly optimized security constrained economic 
dispatch for Energy and Operating Reserves solution for a Resource produced by the ISO’s technical 
software for the purpose of maintaining sufficient Operating Reserve (both online and off-line) or for the 
provision of voltage or VAR support.  
 
Posturing Credits are the Real-Time Posturing NCPC Credits for Generators (Other Than Limited 
Energy Resources) Postured for Reliability and the Real-Time Posturing NCPC Credit for Limited 
Energy Resources Postured for Reliability. 
 
Power Purchaser is the entity that is purchasing the capacity and/or energy to be transmitted under the 
OATT.  
 
Principal is (i) the sole proprietor of a sole proprietorship; (ii) a general partner of a partnership; (iii) a 
president, chief executive officer, chief operating officer or chief financial officer (or equivalent position) 
of an organization; (iv) a manager, managing member or a member vested with the management authority 
for a limited liability company or limited liability partnership; (v) any person or entity that has the power 
to exercise a controlling influence over an organization’s activities that are subject to regulation by the 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Commodity 
Futures Trading Commission, any exchange monitored by the National Futures Association, or any state 
entity responsible for regulating activity in energy markets; or (vi) any person or entity that: (a) is the 
direct owner of 10% or more of any class of an organization’s equity securities; or (b) has directly 
contributed 10% or more of an organization’s capital. 
 
Profiled Load Assets include all Load Assets that are not directly metered by OP-18 compliant metering 
as currently described in Section IV (Metering and Recording for Settlements) of OP18, and some Load 
Assets that are measured by OP-18 compliant metering (as currently described in Section IV of OP-18) to 
which the Host Participant Assigned Meter Reader allocates non-PTF losses.  
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Project Sponsor is an entity seeking to have a New Generating Capacity Resource, New Import Capacity 
Resource, New Demand Capacity Resource, or New Distributed Energy Capacity Resource participate in 
the Forward Capacity Market, as described in Section III.13.  
 
Proxy De-List Bid is a type of bid used in the Forward Capacity Market. 
 
Provisional Member is defined in Section I.68A of the Restated NEPOOL Agreement. 
 
PTO Administrative Committee is the committee referred to in Section 11.04 of the TOA.  
 
Public Policy Requirement is a requirement reflected in a statute enacted by, or a regulation 
promulgated by, the federal government or a state or local (e.g., municipal or county) government.  
 
Public Policy Transmission Study is a study conducted by the ISO pursuant to the process set out in 
Section 4A.3 of Attachment K of the OATT, and consists of two phases:  (i) an initial phase to produce a 
rough estimate of the costs and benefits of concepts that could meet transmission needs driven by public 
policy requirements; and (ii) a follow-on phase designed to produce more detailed analysis and 
engineering work on transmission concepts identified in the first phase. 
 
Public Policy Local Transmission Study is a study conducted by a PTO pursuant to the process set out 
in Section 1.6 of Attachment K Appendix 1 of the OATT, and consists of two phases:  (i) an initial phase 
to produce an estimate of the costs and benefits of concepts that could meet transmission needs driven by 
public policy requirements; and (ii) a follow-on phase designed to produce more detailed analysis and 
engineering work on transmission concepts identified in the first phase. 
 
Public Policy Transmission Upgrade is an addition and/or upgrade to the New England Transmission 
System that meets the voltage and non-voltage criteria for Public Policy Transmission Upgrade PTF 
classification specified in the OATT, and has been included in the Regional System Plan and RSP Project 
List as a Public Policy Transmission Upgrade pursuant to the procedures described in Section 4A of 
Attachment K of the OATT. 
 
Publicly Owned Entity is defined in Section I of the Restated NEPOOL Agreement. 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Qualification Process Cost Reimbursement Deposit is described in Section III.13.1.9.3 of Market Rule 
1.  
 
Qualified Capacity is the amount of capacity a resource may provide in the summer or winter in a 
Capacity Commitment Period, as determined in the Forward Capacity Market qualification processes.  
 
Qualified Generator Reactive Resource(s) is any generator source of dynamic reactive power that 
meets the criteria specified in Schedule 2 of the OATT. 
 
Qualified Non-Generator Reactive Resource(s) is any non-generator source of dynamic reactive power 
that meets the criteria specified in Schedule 2 of the OATT. 
 
Qualified Reactive Resource(s) is any Qualified Generator Reactive Resource and/or Qualified Non-
Generator Reactive Resource that meets the criteria specified in Schedule 2 of the OATT. 
 
Qualified Transmission Project Sponsor is defined in Sections 4B.2 and 4B.3 of Attachment K of the 
OATT. 
 
Queue Position has the meaning specified in Section I of Schedule 22, Attachment 1 to Schedule 23, and 
Section I of Schedule 25 of the OATT. 
 
Rapid Response Pricing Asset is: (i) a Fast Start Generator; (ii) a Flexible DNE Dispatchable Generator; 
or (iii) a Binary Storage DARD with Offer Data specifying a Minimum Run Time and a Minimum Down 
Time not exceeding one hour each.  A Rapid Response Pricing Asset shall also include a Fast Start 
Demand Response Resource for which the Market Participant’s Offer Data meets the following criteria: 
(i) Minimum Reduction Time does not exceed one hour; and (ii) Demand Response Resource Notification 
Time plus Demand Response Resource Start-Up Time does not exceed 30 minutes. 
 
Rapid Response Pricing Opportunity Cost is the NCPC Credit described in Section III.F.2.3.10.  
 
Rated means a Market Participant that receives a credit rating from one or more of the Rating Agencies, 
or, if such Market Participant is not rated by one of the Rating Agencies, then a Market Participant that 
has outstanding unsecured debt rated by one or more of the Rating Agencies. 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Rating Agencies are Standard and Poor’s (S&P), Moody’s, and Fitch. 
 
Rationing Minimum Limit is the MW quantity for a New Generating Capacity Resource or Existing 
Generating Capacity Resource below which an offer or bid may not be rationed in the Forward Capacity 
Auction, but shall not apply to supply offers or demand bids in a substitution auction as specified in 
Section III.13.2.8.2 and Section III.13.2.8.3. 
 
RBA Decision is a written decision provided by the ISO to a Disputing Party and to the Chair of the 
NEPOOL Budget and Finance Subcommittee accepting or denying a Requested Billing Adjustment 
within twenty Business Days of the date the ISO distributes a Notice of RBA, unless some later date is 
agreed upon by the Disputing Party and the ISO.  
 
Reactive Capability Audit is an audit that measures the ability of a Reactive Resource to provide or 
absorb reactive power to or from the transmission system at a specified real power output or consumption. 
 
Reactive Resource is a device that dynamically adjusts reactive power output automatically in Real-Time 
over a continuous range, taking into account control system response bandwidth, within a specified 
voltage bandwidth in response to grid voltage changes.  These resources operate to maintain a set-point 
voltage and include, but are not limited to, Generator Assets, Dispatchable Asset Related Demands that 
are part of an Electric Storage Facility, and dynamic transmission devices. 
 
Reactive Supply and Voltage Control Service is the form of Ancillary Service described in Schedule 2 
of the OATT.  
 
Real-Time is a period in the current Operating Day for which the ISO dispatches Resources for energy 
and Regulation, designates Resources for Regulation and Operating Reserve and, if necessary, commits 
additional Resources.  
 
Real-Time Adjusted Load Obligation is defined in Section III.3.2.1(b) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Real-Time Adjusted Load Obligation Deviation is defined in Section III.3.2.1(d) of Market Rule 1. 
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Real-Time Commitment NCPC Credit is an NCPC Credit calculated pursuant to Appendix F to Market 
Rule 1. 
 
Real-Time Congestion Revenue is defined in Section III.3.2.1(i) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Real-Time Demand Reduction Obligation is defined in Section III.3.2.1(c) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Real-Time Demand Reduction Obligation Deviation is defined in Section III.3.2.1(e) of Market Rule 
1. 
 
Real-Time Dispatch NCPC Credit is an NCPC Credit calculated pursuant to Appendix F to Market 
Rule 1.  
 
Real-Time Energy Inventory is a component of the spot payment that a Market Participant may receive 
through the inventoried energy program, as described in Section III.K.3.2.1 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Real-Time Energy Market means the purchase or sale of energy, purchase of demand reductions, 
payment of Congestion Costs, and payment for losses for quantity deviations from the Day-Ahead Energy 
Market in the Operating Day and designation of and payment for provision of Operating Reserve in Real-
Time.  
 
Real-Time Energy Market Deviation Congestion Charge/Credit is defined in Section III.3.2.1(g) of 
Market Rule 1.  
 
Real-Time Energy Market Deviation Energy Charge/Credit is defined in Section III.3.2.1(g) of 
Market Rule 1.  
 
Real-Time Energy Market Deviation Loss Charge/Credit is defined in Section III.3.2.1(g) of Market 
Rule 1.  
 
Real-Time Energy Market NCPC Credits are the Real-Time Commitment NCPC Credit and the Real-
Time Dispatch NCPC Credit. 
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Real-Time External Transaction NCPC Credit is an NCPC Credit calculated pursuant to Appendix F 
to Market Rule 1. 
 
Real-Time Generation Obligation is defined in Section III.3.2.1(b) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Real-Time Generation Obligation Deviation is defined in Section III.3.2.1(d) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Real-Time High Operating Limit is the maximum output, in MW, of a Generator Asset that could be 
achieved, consistent with Good Utility Practice, in response to an ISO request for Energy (including 
pursuant to Section III.13.6.4 of Market Rule 1), for each hour of the Operating Day, as reflected in the 
Generator Asset’s Offer Data. This value is based on real-time operating conditions and the physical 
operating characteristics and operating permits of the facility and must be submitted for all Generator 
Assets (other than Settlement Only Resources).  
 
Real-Time Load Obligation is defined in Section III.3.2.1(b) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Real-Time Load Obligation Deviation is defined in Section III.3.2.1(d) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Real-Time Locational Adjusted Net Interchange is defined in Section III.3.2.1(b) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Real-Time Locational Adjusted Net Interchange Deviation is defined in Section III.3.2.1(d) of Market 
Rule 1.  
 
Real-Time Loss Revenue is defined in Section III.3.2.1(l) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Real-Time Loss Revenue Charges or Credits are defined in Section III.3.2.1(m) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Real-Time NCP Load Obligation is the maximum hourly value, during a month, of a Market 
Participant’s Real-Time Load Obligation summed over all Locations, excluding exports, in kilowatts. 
 
Real-Time Offer Change is a modification to a Supply Offer pursuant to Section III.1.10.9(b). 
 
Real-Time Posturing NCPC Credit for Generators (Other Than Limited Energy Resources) 
Postured for Reliability is an NCPC Credit calculated pursuant to Appendix F to Market Rule 1. 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Real-Time Posturing NCPC Credit for Limited Energy Resources Postured for Reliability is an 
NCPC Credit calculated pursuant to Appendix F to Market Rule 1. 
 
Real-Time Prices means the Locational Marginal Prices resulting from the ISO’s dispatch of the New 
England Markets in the Operating Day. 
 
Real-Time Reserve Charge is a Market Participant’s share of applicable system and Reserve Zone Real-
Time Operating Reserve costs attributable to meeting the Real-Time Operating Reserve requirement as 
calculated in accordance with Section III.10 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Real-Time Reserve Clearing Price is the Real-Time TMSR, TMNSR or TMOR clearing price, as 
applicable, for the system and each Reserve Zone that is calculated in accordance with Section  
III.2.7A of Market Rule 1.  
 
Real-Time Reserve Credit is a Market Participant’s compensation associated with that Market 
Participant’s Resources’ Reserve Quantity For Settlement as calculated in accordance with Section III.10 
of Market Rule 1.  
 
Real-Time Reserve Designation is the amount, in MW, of Operating Reserve designated to a Resource 
in Real-Time by the ISO as described in Section III.1.7.19 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Real-Time Reserve Opportunity Cost is defined in Section III.2.7A(b) of Market Rule 1. 
 
Real-Time Synchronous Condensing NCPC Credit is an NCPC Credit calculated pursuant to 
Appendix F to Market Rule 1. 
 
Real-Time System Adjusted Net Interchange means, for each hour, the sum of Real-Time Locational 
Adjusted Net Interchange for a Market Participant over all Locations, in kilowatts.  
 
Receiving Party is the entity receiving the capacity and/or energy transmitted to Point(s) of Delivery 
under the OATT.  
 
Reference Level is defined in Section III.A.5.7 of Appendix A of Market Rule 1.  
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Regional Benefit Upgrade(s) (RBU) means a Transmission Upgrade that:  (i) is rated 115kV or above; 
(ii) meets all of the non-voltage criteria for PTF classification specified in the OATT; and  
(iii) is included in the Regional System Plan as either a Reliability Transmission Upgrade or a Market 
Efficiency Transmission Upgrade identified as needed pursuant to Attachment K of the OATT. The 
category of RBU shall not include any Transmission Upgrade that has been categorized under any of the 
other categories specified in Schedule 12 of the OATT (e.g., an Elective Transmission Upgrade shall not 
also be categorized as an RBU).  Any upgrades to transmission facilities rated below 115kV that were 
PTF prior to January 1, 2004 shall remain classified as PTF and be categorized as an RBU if, and for so 
long as, such upgrades meet the criteria for PTF specified in the OATT.  
 
Regional Network Load is the load that a Network Customer designates for Regional Network Service 
under Part II.B of the OATT.  The Network Customer’s Regional Network Load shall include all load 
designated by the Network Customer (including losses).  A Network Customer may elect to designate less 
than its total load as Regional Network Load but may not designate only part of the load at a discrete 
Point of Delivery. Where a Transmission Customer has elected not to designate a particular load at 
discrete Points of Delivery as Regional Network Load, the Transmission Customer is responsible for 
making separate arrangements under Part II.C of the OATT for any Point-To-Point Service that may be 
necessary for such non-designated load. A Network Customer’s Monthly Regional Network Load shall be 
calculated in accordance with Section II.21.2 of the OATT. 
 
Regional Network Service (RNS) is the transmission service over the PTF described in Part II.B of the 
OATT, including such service which is used with respect to Network Resources or Regional Network 
Load that is not physically interconnected with the PTF.  
 
Regional Planning Dispute Resolution Process is described in Section 12 of Attachment K to the 
OATT.  
 
Regional System Plan (RSP) is the plan developed under the process specified in Attachment K of the 
OATT.  
 
Regional Transmission Service (RTS) is Regional Network Service and Through or Out Service as 
provided over the PTF in accordance with Section II.B, Section II.C, Schedule 8 and Schedule 9 of the 
OATT. 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Regulation is the capability of a specific Resource with appropriate telecommunications, control and 
response capability to respond to an AGC SetPoint.  
 
Regulation and Frequency Response Service is the form of Ancillary Service described in Schedule 3 
of the OATT.  The capability of performing Regulation and Frequency Response Service is referred to as 
automatic generation control (AGC).  
 
Regulation Capacity is the lesser of five times the Automatic Response Rate and one-half of the 
difference between the Regulation High Limit and the Regulation Low Limit of a Resource capable of 
providing Regulation. 
 
Regulation Capacity Requirement is the amount of Regulation Capacity required to maintain system 
control and reliability in the New England Control Area as calculated and posted on the ISO website. 
 
Regulation Capacity Offer is an offer by a Market Participant to provide Regulation Capacity. 
 
Regulation High Limit is an offer parameter that establishes the upper bound for AGC SetPoints and is 
used in the determination of a Resource’s Regulation Capacity.  
 
Regulation Low Limit is an offer parameter that establishes the lower bound for AGC SetPoints and is 
used in the determination of a Resource’s Regulation Capacity.  
 
Regulation Market is the market described in Section III.14 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Regulation Resources are those Alternative Technology Regulation Resources and Generator Assets that 
satisfy the requirements of Section III.14.2.  Regulation Resources are eligible to participate in the 
Regulation Market. 
 
Regulation Service is the change in output or consumption made in response to changing AGC 
SetPoints. 
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Regulation Service Requirement is the estimated amount of Regulation Service required to maintain 
system control and reliability in the New England Control Area as calculated and posted on the ISO 
website. 
 
Regulation Service Offer is an offer by a Market Participant to provide Regulation Service. 
 
Related Person is defined pursuant to Section 1.1 of the Participants Agreement.  
 
 
Related Transaction is defined in Section III.1.4.3 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Reliability Administration Service (RAS) is the service provided by the ISO, as described in Schedule 3 
of Section IV.A of the Tariff, in order to administer the Reliability Markets and provide other reliability-
related and informational functions.  
 
Reliability Committee is the committee whose responsibilities are specified in Section 8.2.3 of the 
Participants Agreement.  
 
Reliability Markets are, collectively, the ISO’s administration of Regulation, the Forward Capacity 
Market, and Operating Reserve.  
 
Reliability Region means any one of the regions identified on the ISO’s website.  Reliability Regions are 
intended to reflect the operating characteristics of, and the major transmission constraints on, the New 
England Transmission System.  
 
Reliability Transmission Upgrade means those additions and upgrades not required by the 
interconnection of a generator that are nonetheless necessary to ensure the continued reliability of the 
New England Transmission System, taking into account load growth and known resource changes, and 
include those upgrades necessary to provide acceptable stability response, short circuit capability and 
system voltage levels, and those facilities required to provide adequate thermal capability and local 
voltage levels that cannot otherwise be achieved with reasonable assumptions for certain amounts of 
generation being unavailable (due to maintenance or forced outages) for purposes of long-term planning 
studies.  Good Utility Practice, applicable reliability principles, guidelines, criteria, rules, procedures and 
standards of ERO and NPCC and any of their successors, applicable publicly available local reliability 
criteria, and the ISO System Rules, as they may be amended from time to time, will be used to define the 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
system facilities required to maintain reliability in evaluating proposed Reliability Transmission 
Upgrades.  A Reliability Transmission Upgrade may provide market efficiency benefits as well as 
reliability benefits to the New England Transmission System.  
 
Remittance Advice is an issuance from the ISO for the net Payment owed to a Covered Entity where a 
Covered Entity’s total Payments exceed its total Charges in a billing period. 
 
Remittance Advice Date is the day on which the ISO issues a Remittance Advice. 
 
Renewable Technology Resource is a Generating Capacity Resource or an On-Peak Demand Resource 
that satisfies the requirements specified in Section III.13.1.1.1.7. 
 
Re-Offer Period is the period that normally occurs between the posting of the of the Day-Ahead Energy 
Market results and 2:00 p.m. on the day before the Operating Day during which a Market Participant may 
submit revised Supply Offers, revised External Transactions, or revised Demand Bids associated with 
Dispatchable Asset Related Demands or, revised Demand Reduction Offers associated with Demand 
Response Resources. 
 
Replacement Reserve is described in Part III, Section VII of ISO New England Operating Procedure No. 
8.  
 
Request for Alternative Proposals (RFAP) is the request described in Attachment K of the OATT.  
 
Requested Billing Adjustment (RBA) is defined in Section 6.1 of the ISO New England Billing Policy. 
 
Required Balance is an amount as defined in Section 5.3 of the Billing Policy.  
 
Reseller is a MGTSA holder that sells, assigns or transfers its rights under its MGTSA, as described in 
Section II.45.1(a) of the OATT. 
 
Reserve Adequacy Analysis is the analysis performed by the ISO to determine if adequate Resources are 
committed to meet forecasted load, Operating Reserve, and security constraint requirements for the 
current and next Operating Day. 
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Reserve Constraint Penalty Factors (RCPFs) are rates, in $/MWh, that are used within the Real-Time 
dispatch and pricing algorithm to reflect the value of Operating Reserve shortages and are defined in 
Section III.2.7A(c) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Reserve Quantity For Settlement is defined in Section III.10.1 of Market Rule 1.   
 
Reserve Zone is defined in Section III.2.7 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Reserved Capacity is the maximum amount of capacity and energy that is committed to the 
Transmission Customer for transmission over the New England Transmission System between the 
Point(s) of Receipt and the Point(s) of Delivery under Part II.C or Schedule 18, 20 or 21 of the OATT, as 
applicable.  Reserved Capacity shall be expressed in terms of whole kilowatts on a sixty-minute interval 
(commencing on the clock hour) basis, or, in the case of Reserved Capacity for Local Point-to-Point 
Service, in terms of whole megawatts on a sixty-minute interval basis.  
 
Resource means a Generator Asset, a Dispatchable Asset Related Demand, an External Resource, an 
External Transaction, a Demand Response Resource, a Settlement Only Distributed Energy Resource 
Aggregation, or a Demand Response Distributed Energy Resource Aggregation. 
 
Restated New England Power Pool Agreement (RNA) is the Second Restated New England Power 
Pool Agreement, which restated for a second time by an amendment dated as of August 16, 2004 the New 
England Power Pool Agreement dated September 1, 1971, as the same may be amended and restated from 
time to time, governing the relationship among the NEPOOL members. 
 
Rest-of-Pool Capacity Zone is a single Capacity Zone made up of the adjacent Load Zones that are 
neither export-constrained nor import-constrained.  
 
Rest of System is an area established under Section III.2.7(d) of Market Rule 1. 
 
Retail Delivery Point is the point on the transmission or distribution system at which the load of an end-
use facility, which is metered and assigned a unique account number by the Host Participant, is measured 
to determine the amount of energy delivered to the facility from the transmission and distribution system.  
If an end-use facility is connected to the transmission or distribution system at more than one location, the 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Retail Delivery Point shall consist of the metered load at each connection point, summed to measure the 
net energy delivered to the facility in each interval.  
 
Retirement De-List Bid is a bid to retire an Existing Generating Capacity Resource, Existing Import 
Capacity Resource, Existing Demand Capacity Resource, or Existing Distributed Energy Capacity 
Resource from all New England Markets, as described in Section III.13.1.2.3.1.5.  
 
Returning Market Participant is a Market Participant, other than an FTR-Only Customer or a 
Governance Only Member, whose previous membership as a Market Participant was involuntarily 
terminated due to a Financial Assurance Default or a payment default and, since returning, has been a 
Market Participant for less than six consecutive months. 
 
Revenue Requirement is defined in Section IV.A.2.1 of the Tariff.  
 
Reviewable Action is defined in Section III.D.1.1 of Appendix D of Market Rule 1.  
 
Reviewable Determination is defined in Section 12.4(a) of Attachment K to the OATT. 
 
RSP Project List is defined in Section 1 of Attachment K to the OATT.  
 
RTEP02 Upgrade(s) means a Transmission Upgrade that was included in the annual NEPOOL 
Transmission Plan (also known as the “Regional Transmission Expansion Plan” or “RTEP”) for the year 
2002, as approved by ISO New England Inc.’s Board of Directors, or the functional equivalent of such 
Transmission Upgrade, as determined by ISO New England Inc.  The RTEP02 Upgrades are listed in 
Schedule 12B of the OATT.  
 
RTO is a regional transmission organization or comparable independent transmission organization that 
complies with Order No. 2000 and the Commission’s corresponding regulation.  
 
Same Reserve Zone Export Transaction is defined in Section III.1.10.7(f)(iii) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Schedule, Schedules, Schedule 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 are references to the individual or collective schedules to 
Section IV.A. of the Tariff.  
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Schedule 20A Service Provider (SSP) is defined in Schedule 20A to Section II of this Tariff.  
 
Scheduling Service, for purposes of Section IV.A and Section IV.B of the Tariff, is the service described 
in Schedule 1 to Section IV.A of the Tariff. 
 
Scheduling, System Control and Dispatch Service, for purposes of Section II of the Tariff, is the form 
of Ancillary Service described in Schedule 1 of the OATT.  
 
Seasonal Claimed Capability is the summer or winter claimed capability of a Generator Asset or 
Generating Capacity Resource, and represents the maximum dependable load carrying ability of the asset 
or resource, excluding capacity required for station use.  
 
Seasonal Claimed Capability Audit is the Generator Asset audit performed pursuant to Section 
III.1.5.1.3. 
 
Seasonal DR Audit is the Demand Response Resource audit performed pursuant to Section III.1.5.1.3.1. 
 
Seasonal Peak Demand Resource is a type of Demand Capacity Resource and shall mean installed 
measures (e.g., products, equipment, systems, services, practices and/or strategies) on end-use customer 
facilities that reduce the total amount of electrical energy consumed during Demand Resource Seasonal 
Peak Hours, while delivering a comparable or acceptable level of end-use service. Such measures include 
Energy Efficiency, Load Management, and Distributed Generation.  
 
Section III.1.4 Transactions are defined in Section III.1.4.2 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Section III.1.4 Conforming Transactions are defined in Section III.1.4.2 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Security Agreement is Attachment 1 to the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy.  
 
Selected Qualified Transmission Project Sponsor is the Qualified Transmission Project Sponsor that 
proposed the Phase Two Solution, Stage Two Solution, or Longer-Term Proposal that has been identified 
by the ISO as the preferred Phase Two Solution, Stage Two Solution, or Longer-Term Transmission 
Solution. 
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Selected Qualified Transmission Project Sponsor Agreement is the agreement between the ISO and a 
Selected Qualified Transmission Project Sponsor.  The Selected Qualified Transmission Project Sponsor 
Agreement is provided in Attachment P to the OATT.   
 
Self-Schedule is the action of a Market Participant in committing its Generator Asset or DARD, in 
accordance with applicable ISO New England Manuals, to provide service in an hour, whether or not in 
the absence of that action the Generator Asset or DARD would have been committed by the ISO to 
provide the service. For a Generator Asset, Self-Schedule is the action of a Market Participant in 
committing a Generator Asset to provide Energy in an hour at its Economic Minimum Limit, whether or 
not in the absence of that action the Generator Asset would have been committed by the ISO to provide 
the Energy.  For a DARD, Self-Schedule is the action of a Market Participant in committing a DARD to 
consume Energy in an hour at its Minimum Consumption Limit, whether or not in the absence of that 
action the DARD would have been committed by the ISO to consume Energy. For an External 
Transaction in the Day-Ahead Energy Market, a Self-Schedule is a request by a Market Participant for the 
ISO to select the External Transaction subject to the conditions specified in Section III.1.10.1A(b)(iii) and 
(iv).  For an External Transaction in the Real-Time Energy Market, a Self-Schedule is a request by a 
Market Participant for the ISO to select the External Transaction regardless of LMP.  Demand Response 
Resources are not permitted to Self-Schedule. 
 
Self-Supplied FCA Resource is described in Section III.13.1.6 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Senior Officer means an officer of the subject entity with the title of vice president (or similar office) or 
higher, or another officer designated in writing to the ISO by that officer. 
 
Service Agreement is a Transmission Service Agreement or an MPSA.  
 
Service Commencement Date is the date service is to begin pursuant to the terms of an executed Service 
Agreement, or the date service begins in accordance with the sections of the OATT addressing the filing 
of unexecuted Service Agreements.  
 
Services means, collectively, the Scheduling Service, EAS and RAS; individually, a Service.  
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Settlement Financial Assurance is an amount of financial assurance required from a Designated FTR 
Participant awarded a bid in an FTR Auction.  This amount is calculated pursuant to Section VI.C of the 
ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy.  
 
Settlement Only Distributed Energy Resource Aggregation (SODERA) is a type of Distributed 
Energy Resource Aggregation and is described in additional detail in Section III.6.6.   
 
Settlement Only Resources are generators of less than 5 MW of maximum net output when operating at 
any temperature at or above zero degrees Fahrenheit, that meet the metering, interconnection and other 
requirements in ISO New England Operating Procedure No. 14 and that have elected Settlement Only 
Resource treatment as described in the ISO New England Manual for Registration and Performance 
Auditing.  
 
Shortfall Funding Arrangement, as specified in Section 5.1 of the ISO New England Billing Policy, is a 
separate financing arrangement that can be used to make up any non-congestion related differences 
between amounts received on Invoices and amounts due for ISO Charges in any bill issued. 
 
Short-Term is a period of less than one year.  
 
Significantly Reduced Congestion Costs are defined in Section III.G.2.2 of Appendix G to Market Rule 
1. 
 
SMD Effective Date is March 1, 2003.  
 
Solar High Limit is the estimated power output (MW) of a solar Generator Asset given the Real-Time 
solar and weather conditions, taking into account equipment outages, and absent any self-imposed 
reductions in power output or any reduction in power output as a result of a Dispatch Instruction, 
calculated in the manner described in the ISO Operating Documents. 
 
Solar Plant Future Availability is the forecasted Real-Time High Operating Limit of a solar Generator 
Asset, calculated in the manner described in the ISO Operating Documents. 
 
Solutions Study is described in Section 4.2(b) of Attachment K to the OATT.  
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Special Constraint Resource (SCR) is a Resource that provides Special Constraint Resource Service 
under Schedule 19 of the OATT.  
 
Special Constraint Resource Service is the form of Ancillary Service described in Schedule 19 of the 
OATT. 
 
Specified-Term Blackstart Capital Payment is the annual compensation level, as calculated pursuant to 
Section 5.1 of Schedule 16 of the OATT, for a Designated Blackstart Resource’s capital Blackstart 
Equipment costs associated with the provision of Blackstart Service (except for capital costs associated 
with adhering to NERC Critical Infrastructure Protection Reliability Standards as part of Blackstart 
Service). 
 
Sponsored Policy Resource is a New Capacity Resource, each asset of which: receives a revenue source, 
other than revenues from ISO-administered markets, that is supported by a government-regulated rate, 
charge, or other regulated cost recovery mechanism, and; qualifies as a renewable, clean, zero carbon, or 
alternative energy asset under a renewable energy portfolio standard, clean energy standard, 
decarbonization or net-zero carbon standard, alternative energy portfolio standard, renewable energy goal, 
clean energy goal, or decarbonization or net-zero carbon goal enacted by federal or New England state 
statute, regulation, or executive or administrative order and as a result of which the asset receives the 
revenue source. 
 
Stage One Proposal is a first round submission, as defined in Section 4A.6 of Attachment K of the 
OATT, of a proposal for a Public Policy Transmission Upgrade by a Qualified Transmission Project 
Sponsor. 
 
Stage Two Solution is a second round submission, as defined in Section 4A.8 of Attachment K of the 
OATT, of a proposal for a Public Policy Transmission Upgrade by a Qualified Transmission Project 
Sponsor. 
 
Stakeholder-Requested Scenario is an Economic Study reference scenario that is described in Section 
17.2(d) of Attachment K to the OATT. 
 
Standard Blackstart Capital Payment is the annual compensation level, as calculated pursuant to 
Section 5.1 of Schedule 16 of the OATT, for a Designated Blackstart Resource’s capital Blackstart 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Equipment costs associated with the provision of Blackstart Service (except for capital costs associated 
with adhering to NERC Critical Infrastructure Protection Reliability Standards as part of Blackstart 
Service). 
 
Start-of-Round Price is the highest price associated with a round of a Forward Capacity Auction as 
described in Section III.13.2.3.1 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Start-Up Fee is the amount, in dollars, that must be paid for a Generator Asset to Market Participants 
with an Ownership Share in the Generator Asset each time the Generator Asset is scheduled in the New 
England Markets to start-up.  
 
Start-Up Time is the time it takes the Generator Asset, after synchronizing to the system, to reach its 
Economic Minimum Limit and, for dispatchable Generator Assets, be ready for further dispatch by the 
ISO. 
 
State Estimator means the computer model of power flows specified in Section III.2.3 of Market Rule 1.  
 
State-identified Requirement refers to a legal requirement, mandate or policy of a New England state or 
local government that forms the basis for a Longer-Term Transmission Study request submitted to the 
ISO pursuant to the process set out in Section 16 of Attachment K of the OATT. 
 
Statements, for the purpose of the ISO New England Billing Policy, refer to both Invoices and 
Remittance Advices. 
 
Static De-List Bid is a bid that may be submitted by an Existing Generating Capacity Resource, Existing 
Import Capacity Resource, Existing Demand Capacity Resource, or Existing Distributed Energy Capacity 
Resource in the Forward Capacity Auction to remove itself from the capacity market for a one year 
period, as described in Section III.13.1.2.3.1.1 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Station is one or more Existing Generating Capacity Resources consisting of one or more assets located 
within a common property boundary.  
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Station Going Forward Common Costs are the net costs associated with a Station that are avoided only 
by the clearing of the Static De-List Bids, the Permanent De-List Bids or the Retirement De-List Bids of 
all the Existing Generating Capacity Resources comprising the Station.  
 
Station-level Blackstart O&M Payment is defined and calculated as specified in Section 5.1.2 of 
Schedule 16 to the OATT. 
 
Station-level Specified-Term Blackstart Capital Payment is defined and calculated as specified in 
Section 5.1.2 of Schedule 16 to the OATT. 
 
Station-level Standard Blackstart Capital Payment is defined and calculated as specified in Section 
5.1.2 of Schedule 16 to the OATT. 
 
Storage DARD is a DARD that participates in the New England Markets as part of an Electric Storage 
Facility, as described in Section III.1.10.6 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Substation Network Upgrades has the meaning specified in Section I of Schedule 22, Section 1 of 23, 
and Section I of 25 of the OATT. 
 
Summer ARA Qualified Capacity is described in Section III.13.4.2.1.2.1.1.1 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Summer Capability Period means one of two time periods defined by the ISO for the purposes of rating 
and auditing resources pursuant to Section III.9.  The time period associated with the Summer Capability 
Period is the period of June 1 through September 30.  
 
Summer Intermittent Reliability Hours are defined in Section III.13.1.2.2.2.1(c) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Supply Offer is a proposal to furnish energy at a Node or Regulation from a Resource that meets the 
applicable requirements set forth in the ISO New England Manuals submitted to the ISO by a Market 
Participant with authority to submit a Supply Offer for the Resource.  The Supply Offer will be submitted 
pursuant to Market Rule 1 and applicable ISO New England Manuals, and include a price and 
information with respect to the quantity proposed to be furnished, technical parameters for the Resource, 
timing and other matters.  A Supply Offer is a subset of the information required in a Market Participant’s 
Offer Data.  
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Supply Offer Block-Hours are Block-Hours assigned to the Lead Market Participant for each Supply 
Offer.  Blocks of the Supply Offer in effect for each hour will be totaled to determine the quantity of 
Supply Offer Block-Hours for a given day. In the case that a Resource has a Real-Time unit status of 
“unavailable” for the entire day, that day will not contribute to the quantity of Supply Offer Block-Hours.  
However, if the Resource has at least one hour of the day with a unit status of “available,” the entire day 
will contribute to the quantity of Supply Offer Block-Hours.  
 
Synchronous Condenser is a generator that is synchronized to the grid but supplying no energy for the 
purpose of providing Operating Reserve or VAR or voltage support. 
 
System Condition is a specified condition on the New England Transmission System or on a neighboring 
system, such as a constrained transmission element or flowgate, that may trigger Curtailment of Long-
Term Firm MTF or OTF Service on the MTF or the OTF using the curtailment priority pursuant to 
Section II.44 of the Tariff or Curtailment of Local Long-Term Firm Point-to-Point Transmission Service 
on the non-PTF using the curtailment priority pursuant to Schedule 21 of the Tariff. Such conditions must 
be identified in the Transmission Customer’s Service Agreement.  
 
System Impact Study is an assessment pursuant to Part II.B, II.C, II.G, Schedule 21, Schedule 22,  
Schedule 23, or Schedule 25 of the OATT of (i) the adequacy of the PTF or Non-PTF to accommodate a 
request for the interconnection of a new or materially changed generating unit or a new or materially 
changed interconnection to another Control Area or new Regional Network Service or new Local Service 
or an Elective Transmission Upgrade, and (ii) whether any additional costs may be required to be incurred 
in order to provide the interconnection or transmission service.  
 
System Network Upgrades has the meaning specified in Section I of Schedule 22, Section 1 of 23, and 
Section I of 25 of the OATT. 
 
System Operator shall mean ISO New England Inc. or a successor organization.  
 
System Operating Limit (SOL) has the meaning specified in the Glossary of Terms Used in NERC 
Reliability Standards. 
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
System-Wide Capacity Demand Curve is the demand curve used in the Forward Capacity Market as 
specified in Section III.13.2.2. 
 
TADO is the total amount due and owing (not including any amounts due under Section 14.1 of the 
RNA) at such time to the ISO, NEPOOL, the PTOs, the Market Participants and the Non-Market 
Participant Transmission Customers, by all PTOs, Market Participants and Non-Market Participant 
Transmission Customers. 
 
Tangible Net Worth is the value, determined in accordance with international accounting standards or 
generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, of all of that entity’s assets less the 
following:  (i) assets the ISO reasonably believes to be restricted or potentially unavailable to settle a 
claim in the event of a default (e.g., regulatory assets, restricted assets, and Affiliate assets), net of any 
matching liabilities, to the extent that the result of that netting is a positive value; (ii) derivative assets, net 
of any matching liabilities, to the extent that the result of that netting is a positive value; (iii) the amount 
at which the liabilities of the entity would be shown on a balance sheet in accordance with international 
accounting standards or generally accepted accounting principles in the United States; (iv) preferred 
stock: (v) non-controlling interest; and (vi) all of that entity’s intangible assets (e.g., patents, trademarks, 
franchises, intellectual property, goodwill and any other assets not having a physical existence), in each 
case as shown on the most recent financial statements provided by such entity to the ISO. 
 
Technical Committee is defined in Section 8.2 of the Participants Agreement.  
 
Ten-Minute Non-Spinning Reserve (TMNSR) is a form of ten-minute reserve capability, determined 
pursuant to Section III.1.7.19.2.  
 
Ten-Minute Non-Spinning Reserve Service is the form of Ancillary Service described in Schedule 6 of 
the OATT. 
 
Ten-Minute Reserve Requirement is the combined amount of TMSR and TMNSR required system-
wide as described in Section III.2.7A and ISO New England Operating Procedure No. 8. 
 
Ten-Minute Spinning Reserve (TMSR) is a form of ten-minute reserve capability, determined pursuant 
to Section III.1.7.19.2. 
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Ten-Minute Spinning Reserve Requirement is the amount of TMSR required system-wide as described 
in Section III.2.7A and ISO New England Operating Procedure No. 8. 
 
Ten-Minute Spinning Reserve Service is the form of Ancillary Service described in Schedule 5 of the 
OATT. 
 
Third-Party Sale is any sale for resale in interstate commerce to a Power Purchaser that is not designated 
as part of Regional Network Load or Local Network Load under the Regional Network Service or Local 
Network Service, as applicable.  
 
Thirty-Minute Operating Reserve (TMOR) is a form of thirty-minute reserve capability, determined 
pursuant to Section III.1.7.19.2.  
 
Thirty-Minute Operating Reserve Service is the form of Ancillary Service described in Schedule 7 of 
the OATT. 
 
Through or Out Rate (TOUT Rate) is the rate per hour for Through or Out Service, as defined in 
Section II.25.2 of the OATT. 
 
Through or Out Service (TOUT Service) means Point-To-Point Service over the PTF provided by the 
ISO with respect to a transaction that goes through the New England Control Area, as, for example, a 
single transaction where energy or capacity is transmitted into the New England Control Area from New 
Brunswick and subsequently out of the New England Control Area to New York, or a single transaction 
where energy or capacity is transmitted into the New England Control Area from New York through one 
point on the PTF and subsequently flows over the PTF prior to passing out of the New England Control 
Area to New York, or with respect to a transaction which originates at a point on the PTF and flows over 
the PTF prior to passing out of the New England Control Area, as, for example, from Boston to New 
York.  
 
Tie-Line Asset is a physical transmission tie-line, or an inter-state or intra-state border arrangement 
created according to the ISO New England Manuals and registered in accordance with the Asset 
Registration Process.  
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Total Available Amount is the sum of the available amount of the Shortfall Funding Arrangement and 
the balance in the Payment Default Shortfall Fund. 
 
Total Blackstart Capital Payment is the annual compensation calculated under either Section 5.1 or 
Section 5.2 of Schedule 16 of the OATT, as applicable. 
 
Total Blackstart Service Payments is monthly compensation to Blackstart Owners or Market 
Participants, as applicable, and as calculated pursuant to Section 5.6 of Schedule 16 to the OATT. 
 
Total Reserve Requirement, which includes Replacement Reserve, is the combined amount of TMSR, 
TMNSR, and TMOR required system-wide as described in Section III.2.7A and ISO New England 
Operating Procedure No. 8. 
 
Total System Capacity is the aggregate capacity supply curve for the New England Control Area as 
determined in accordance with Section III.13.2.3.3 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Transaction Unit (TU) is a type of billing determinant under Schedule 2 of Section IV.A of the Tariff 
used to assess charges to Customers.  
 
Transition Period: The six-year period commencing on March 1, 1997.  
 
Transmission Charges, for the purposes of the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy and the 
ISO New England Billing Policy, are all charges and payments under Schedules 1, 8 and 9 of the OATT. 
 
Transmission Congestion Credit means the allocated share of total Transmission Congestion Revenue 
credited to each holder of Financial Transmission Rights, calculated and allocated as specified in Section 
III.5.2 of Market Rule 1.  
 
Transmission Congestion Revenue is defined in Section III.5.2.5(a) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Transmission Constraint Penalty Factors are described in Section III.1.7.5 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Transmission Credit Limit is a credit limit, not to be used to meet FTR Requirements, established for 
each Market Participant in accordance with Section II.D and each Non-Market Participant Transmission 
Customer in accordance with Section V.B.2 of the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy. 
 
Transmission Credit Test Percentage is calculated in accordance with Section III.B.1(c) of the ISO 
New England Financial Assurance Policy. 
 
Transmission Customer is any Eligible Customer that (i) executes, on its own behalf or through its 
Designated Agent, an MPSA or TSA, or (ii) requests in writing, on its own behalf or through its 
Designated Agent, that the ISO, the Transmission Owner, or the Schedule 20A Service Provider, as 
applicable, file with the Commission, a proposed unexecuted MPSA or TSA containing terms and 
conditions deemed appropriate by the ISO (in consultation with the applicable PTO, OTO or Schedule 
20A Service Provider) in order that the Eligible Customer may receive transmission service under Section 
II of this Tariff.  A Transmission Customer under Section II of this Tariff includes a Market Participant or 
a Non-Market Participant taking Regional Network Service, Through or Out Service, MTF Service, OTF 
Service, Ancillary Services, or Local Service.  
 
Transmission Default Amount is all or any part of any amount of Transmission Charges due to be paid 
by any Covered Entity that the ISO, in its reasonable opinion, believes will not or has not been paid when 
due. 
 
Transmission Default Period is defined in Section 3.4.f of the ISO New England Billing Policy. 
 
Transmission Late Payment Account is defined in Section 4.2 of the ISO New England Billing Policy. 
 
Transmission Late Payment Account Limit is defined in Section 4.2 of the ISO New England Billing 
Policy. 
 
Transmission Late Payment Charge is defined in Section 4.1 of the ISO New England Billing Policy. 
 
Transmission, Markets and Services Tariff (Tariff) is the ISO New England Inc. Transmission, 
Markets and Services Tariff, as amended from time to time.   
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Transmission Obligations are determined in accordance with Section III.A(vi) of the ISO New England 
Financial Assurance Policy. 
 
Transmission Operating Agreement (TOA) is the Transmission Operating Agreement between and 
among the ISO and the PTOs, as amended and restated from time to time.  
 
Transmission Owner means a PTO, MTO or OTO.  
 
Transmission Provider is the ISO for Regional Network Service and Through or Out Service as 
provided under Section II.B and II.C of the OATT; Cross-Sound Cable, LLC for Merchant Transmission 
Service as provided under Schedule 18 of the OATT; the Schedule 20A Service Providers for Phase I/II 
HVDC-TF Service as provided under Schedule 20A of the OATT; and the Participating Transmission 
Owners for Local Service as provided under Schedule 21 of the OATT.  
 
Transmission Requirements are determined in accordance with Section III.A(iii) of the ISO New 
England Financial Assurance Policy. 
 
Transmission Security Analysis Requirement shall be determined pursuant to Section III.12.2.1.2. 
 
Transmission Service Agreement (TSA) is the initial agreement and any amendments or supplements 
thereto:  (A) in the form specified in either Attachment A or B to the OATT, entered into by the 
Transmission Customer and the ISO for Regional Network Service or Through or Out Service; (B) 
entered into by the Transmission Customer with the ISO and PTO in the form specified in Attachment A 
to Schedule 21 of the OATT; (C) entered into by the Transmission Customer with an OTO or Schedule 
20A Service Provider in the appropriate form specified under Schedule 20 of the OATT; or (D) entered 
into by the Transmission Customer with a MTO in the appropriate form specified under Schedule 18 of 
the OATT.  A Transmission Service Agreement shall be required for Local Service, MTF Service and 
OTF Service, and shall be required for Regional Network Service and Through or Out Service if the 
Transmission Customer has not executed a MPSA.  
 
Transmission Upgrade(s) means an upgrade, modification or addition to the PTF that becomes subject 
to the terms and conditions of the OATT governing rates and service on the PTF on or after January 1,  
2004.  This categorization and cost allocation of Transmission Upgrades shall be as provided for in 
Schedule 12 of the OATT.  
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Transitional Cluster Study has the meaning specified in Section I of Schedule 22, Section 1 of 23, and 
Section I of 25 of the OATT. 
 
Transitional CNR Group Study has the meaning specified in Section I of Schedule 22, Section I of 23, 
and Section I of 25 of the OATT. 
 
UDS is unit dispatch system software.  
 
Unconstrained Export Transaction is defined in Section III.1.10.7(f)(iv) of Market Rule 1. 
 
Uncovered Default Amount is defined in Section 3.3(i) of the ISO New England Billing Policy. 
 
Uncovered Transmission Default Amounts are defined in Section 3.4.f of the ISO New England Billing 
Policy. 
 
Unrated means a Market Participant that is not a Rated Market Participant. 
 
Unsecured Covered Entity is, collectively, an Unsecured Municipal Market Participant and an 
Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entity. 
 
Unsecured Municipal Default Amount is defined in Section 3.3(i) of the ISO New England Billing 
Policy. 
 
Unsecured Municipal Market Participant is defined in Section 3.3(h) of the ISO New England Billing 
Policy. 
 
Unsecured Municipal Transmission Default Amount is defined in Section 3.4.f of the ISO New 
England Billing Policy. 
 
Unsecured Non-Municipal Covered Entity is a Covered Entity that is not a Municipal Market 
Participant or a Non-Market Participant Transmission Customer and has a Market Credit Limit or 
Transmission Credit Limit of greater than $0 under the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy. 
 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
Unsecured Non-Municipal Default Amount is defined in Section 3.3(i) of the ISO New England Billing 
Policy. 
 
Unsecured Non-Municipal Transmission Default Amount is defined in Section 3.3(i) of the ISO New 
England Billing Policy.  
 
Unsecured Transmission Default Amounts are, collectively, the Unsecured Municipal Transmission 
Default Amount and the Unsecured Non-Municipal Transmission Default Amount.  
 
Unsettled FTR Financial Assurance is an amount of financial assurance required from a Designated 
FTR Participant as calculated pursuant to Section VI.B of the ISO New England Financial Assurance 
Policy. 
 
Updated Measurement and Verification Plan is an optional Measurement and Verification Plan that 
may be submitted as part of a subsequent qualification process for a Forward Capacity Auction prior to 
the beginning of the Capacity Commitment Period of the On-Peak Demand Resource or Seasonal Peak 
Demand Response project.  The Updated Measurement and Verification Plan may include updated project 
specifications, measurement and verification protocols, and performance data as described in Section 
III.13.1.4.3.1.2 of Market Rule 1 and the ISO New England Manuals.  
 
VAR CC Rate is the CC rate paid to Qualified Reactive Resources for VAR Service capability under 
Section IV.A of Schedule 2 of the OATT. 
 
VAR Payment is the payment made to Qualified Reactive Resources for VAR Service capability under 
Section IV.A of Schedule 2 of the OATT. 
 
VAR Service is the provision of reactive power voltage support to the New England Transmission 
System by a Qualified Reactive Resource or by other generators that are dispatched by the ISO to provide 
dynamic reactive power as described in Schedule 2 of the OATT. 
 
Virtual Cap is $2,000/MWh. 
 
Virtual Requirements are determined in accordance with Section III.A(iv) of the ISO New England 
Financial Assurance Policy. 
Docket No. ER24-2883-000 – 10/27/2024 
 
Volt Ampere Reactive (VAR) is a measurement of reactive power. 
 
Volumetric Measure (VM) is a type of billing determinant under Schedule 2 of Section IV.A of the 
Tariff used to assess charges to Customers under Section IV.A of the Tariff.  
 
Wind High Limit is the estimated power output (MW) of a wind Generator Asset given the Real-Time 
weather conditions, taking into account equipment outages, and absent any self-imposed reductions in 
power output or any reduction in power output as a result of a Dispatch Instruction, calculated in the 
manner described in the ISO Operating Documents. 
 
Wind Plant Future Availability is the forecasted Real-Time High Operating Limit of a wind Generator 
Asset, calculated in the manner described in the ISO Operating Documents.   
 
Winter ARA Qualified Capacity is described in Section III.13.4.2.1.2.1.1.2 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Winter Capability Period means one of two time periods defined by the ISO for the purposes of rating 
and auditing resources pursuant to Section III.9.  The time period associated with the Winter Capability 
Period is the period October 1 through May 31.  
 
Winter Intermittent Reliability Hours are defined in Section III.13.1.2.2.2.2(c) of Market Rule 1.  
 
Year means a period of 365 or 366 days, whichever is appropriate, commencing on, or on the anniversary 
of March 1, 1997.  Year One is the Year commencing on March 1, 1997, and Years Two and higher 
follow it in sequence.  
 
Zonal Price is calculated in accordance with Section III.2.7 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Zonal Capacity Obligation is calculated in accordance with Section III.13.7.5.2 of Market Rule 1. 
 
Zonal Reserve Requirement is the combined amount of TMSR, TMNSR, and TMOR required for a 
Reserve Zone as described in Section III.2.7A and ISO New England Operating Procedure No. 8. 
 
 
 
 
I.3  
Obligations of Market Participants and Other Customers  
The ISO acts as Counterparty for sales to its Customers of Regional Transmission Service, and for 
agreements and transactions with its Customers, including but not limited to assignments involving 
Customers, and agreements and transactions with Customers involving sale to the ISO and/or purchase 
from the ISO of energy, capacity, reserves, regulation, Ancillary Services, FTRs and involving other 
products, service and transactions, all as specified in Sections II and III of the Tariff (collectively, the 
“Products”).  
 
To the extent permitted by applicable law, any warranties provided by the sellers or assignors to the ISO 
of the Products which cover the Products, whether express or implied, are hereby passed to the Customers 
on a “pass through basis” and to the extent not passed through, any such warranties are hereby assigned 
by ISO to Customers.  Sellers and assignors to the ISO and Customers acknowledge that warranties on 
such Products are limited to that offered by the seller or assignor to the ISO and will exist, if at all, solely 
between the seller or assignor to the ISO and the Customer.  AS BETWEEN CUSTOMER AND ISO AS 
COUNTERPARTY, NO EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES ARE MADE BY THE ISO 
REGARDING THE PRODUCTS SOLD BY THE ISO AS COUNTERPARTY, AND ANY SUCH 
PRODUCTS ARE PROVIDED ON AN “AS IS” AND “AS AVAILABLE” BASIS.  THE ISO MAKES 
NO WARRANTY OR REPRESENTATION THAT THE PRODUCTS WILL BE UNINTERRUPTED 
OR ERROR FREE.  THE CUSTOMER HEREBY WAIVES, AND THE ISO HEREBY DISCLAIMS, 
ALL OTHER WARRANTIES, EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, 
ANY WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, TITLE 
AND NON-INFRINGEMENT.  THE ISO DOES NOT WARRANT THAT THE PRODUCTS 
OFFERED WILL MEET CUSTOMER’S REQUIREMENTS.  NO ORAL OR WRITTEN 
INFORMATION OR ADVICE GIVEN BY THE ISO OR ANY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE 
OF THE ISO SHALL CREATE A WARRANTY OR IN ANY WAY INCREASE THE SCOPE OF 
ANY PASS THROUGH OR ASSIGNED WARRANTY.  SOME JURISDICTIONS DO NOT ALLOW 
THE EXCLUSION OF IMPLIED WARRANTIES IN CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES, SO THE 
ABOVE EXCLUSION APPLIES ONLY TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW. 
 
I.3.1.  Service Agreement:  
Receipt of service under this Tariff requires the execution of a Market Participant Service Agreement in 
the form specified in Attachment A or Attachment A-1, as applicable, to this Tariff unless the Customer 
seeks transmission service only and does not participate in the New England Markets (in which case the 
Customer must execute a Transmission Service Agreement).  Receipt of Local Service under Section II of 
 
 
this Tariff requires the execution of a Transmission Service Agreement in the form specified in 
Attachment A to Schedule 21 of Section II of this Tariff for Local Service and shall be subject to the 
requirements of Schedule 21.  Receipt of OTF Service under Section II of this Tariff requires the 
execution of a Transmission Service Agreement in the appropriate form specified under Schedule 20 of 
Section II of this Tariff and shall be subject to the requirements of Schedule 20.  
 
I.3.2.  Assets:  
Each Market Participant shall, to the fullest extent practicable, cause all of the Assets it owns or operates 
to be designed, constructed, maintained and operated in accordance with Good Utility Practice and the 
provisions of this Tariff, the ISO New England Operating Procedures, and the ISO New England 
Planning Procedures.  
 
I.3.3.  Maintenance and Repair:  
Each Market Participant shall, to the fullest extent practicable:  (a) cause Assets owned or operated by it 
to be withdrawn from operation for maintenance and repair only in accordance with maintenance 
schedules reported to, and approved and published by the ISO in accordance with the ISO New England 
Operating Procedures, (b) restore such Assets to good operating condition with reasonable promptness, 
and (c) in emergency situations, accelerate maintenance and repair at the reasonable request of the ISO in 
accordance with the ISO New England Planning Procedures.   
 
I.3.4.  Central Dispatch:  
Each Market Participant shall, to the fullest extent practicable, subject each of the Assets it owns or 
operates to central dispatch by the ISO; provided, however, that each Market Participant shall at all times 
be the sole judge as to whether or not and to what extent safety requires that at any time any of such 
facilities will be operated at less than their full capacity.  
 
I.3.5.  Provision of Information:  
The Customers shall provide the ISO with any and all information within their custody or control that the 
ISO deems necessary to perform its obligations under this Tariff, subject to applicable confidentiality 
limitations contained in the ISO New England Information Policy. Each Customer shall ensure that the 
ISO has an accurate list of the Customer’s Affiliates.  The ISO will compile a list that shall be considered 
definitive.  It will be the Customer’s responsibility to regularly review the list and to promptly (and in 
advance of Affiliate changes, where possible) provide the ISO with additions and/or corrections to the list 
and, when requested, relevant supporting documentation.  
 
 
 
I.3.6.  Records and Information:  
Each Customer shall keep such records as may reasonably be required by the ISO, and shall furnish to the 
ISO such records, reports and information (including forecasts) as it may reasonably require, provided 
that confidentiality thereof is protected in accordance with the ISO New England Information Policy.  
 
I.3.7.  Payment of Invoices; Compliance with Policies:  
Each Customer is obligated to pay when due in accordance with this Tariff, the ISO New England 
Financial Assurance Policy and the ISO New England Billing Policy all amounts invoiced to it pursuant 
to this Tariff, and to comply with those terms, conditions and policies in all respects.  If a Customer fails 
to meet the requirements specified in the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy and ISO New 
England Billing Policy, the ISO may take such actions as are specified in those policies.  
 
I.3.8.  Protective Devices for Transmission Facilities:  
Each Market Participant shall install, maintain and operate such protective equipment and switching, 
voltage control, load shedding and emergency facilities as the ISO and the applicable Transmission 
Owner may determine to be required in order to assure continuity of service and the stability of the New 
England Transmission System.  
 
I.3.9.  Review of Market Participant’s Proposed Plans:  
 
I.3.9.1  Submission and Review of Proposed Plan Applications:  
Each Market Participant and Transmission Owner shall submit to the ISO at least sixty (60) days prior to 
the proposed in service date in such form, manner and detail as the ISO may reasonably prescribe, (i) any 
new or materially changed plan for additions to or changes to any generating and demand resources or 
transmission facilities rated 69 kV or above subject to control of such Market Participant or Transmission 
Owner, and (ii) any new or materially changed plan for any other action to be taken by the Market 
Participant or Transmission Owner, except for retirements of or reductions in the capacity of a generating 
resource or a demand resource, which may have a significant effect on the stability, reliability or 
operating characteristics of the Transmission Owner’s transmission facilities, the transmission facilities of 
another Transmission Owner, or the system of a Market Participant. In the case of changes to 
transmission facilities developed through the Solutions Study process or the competitive solution process, 
no significant action (other than engineering reasonably necessary to support the Solutions Study or 
competitive solution process) shall be taken.  
 
 
 
Unless the ISO notifies the Market Participant or Transmission Owner in writing within sixty (60) days of 
the submittal (or ninety (90) days if the ISO determines that it requires additional time), that it has 
determined that implementation of the plan will have a significant adverse effect upon the reliability or 
operating characteristics of the Transmission Owner’s transmission facilities, the transmission facilities of 
another Transmission Owner, or the system of a Market Participant, the Market Participant or 
Transmission Owner shall be free to proceed.  
 
The ISO shall maintain on its website a list of such applications that are currently under review and the 
status of each such application.  The ISO shall provide notice of any action taken with respect to any such 
applications, including an explanation of its reasons for such action, to each Market Participant or 
Transmission Owner as soon as reasonably practicable after such action is taken.  The time limits 
provided by this section may be changed with respect to any such submission by agreement between the 
ISO and the Market Participant or Transmission Owner.  
 
I.3.9.2  Additional Review of Additions of or Changes to Generating Resources:   
Proposals for new generating resources or modifications to existing generating resources are also subject 
to the terms set out in Schedule 22, the Large Generator Interconnection Procedures and Agreement, and 
Schedule 23, the Small Generator Interconnection Procedures and Agreement, to Section II of the Tariff.  
 
I.3.9.3  Reliability Review of Retirements of or Reductions in Capacity of an Existing Demand 
Capacity Resource or Existing Generating Capacity Resource:  
Proposals for the reduction of capacity from an Existing Demand Capacity Resource or an Existing 
Generating Capacity Resource below its Qualified Capacity amount for the relevant Capacity 
Commitment Period, including unit retirement, are reviewed for reliability impact pursuant to the terms 
set out in Section III.13.2.5.2.5 of the Tariff.  Once a demand resource or generating resource has a 
cleared de-list bid pursuant to Section III of the Tariff it may reduce its capacity consistent with the terms 
of its de-list bid for all or any part of the Capacity Commitment Period of the approved de-list without 
further reliability review.  However, any proposed physical modification to a de-listed generating facility 
must comply with the requirements, including the reliability review process, set out in Schedules 22 or 
23, as applicable.   
 
I.3.10.  Market Participant to Avoid Adverse Effect:  
 
 
If the ISO notifies a Market Participant pursuant to Section I.3.9.1 that implementation of the Market 
Participant’s or Transmission Owner’s plan has been determined to have a significant adverse effect upon 
the reliability or operating characteristics of the Transmission Owner’s transmission facilities, the 
transmission facilities of another Transmission Owner, or the system of one or more Market Participants, 
the Market Participant or Transmission Owner shall not proceed to implement such plan unless the 
Market Participant (or the Non-Market Participant on whose behalf the Market Participant has submitted 
its plan) or Transmission Owner takes such action or constructs at its expense such facilities as the ISO 
determines to be reasonably necessary to avoid such adverse effect.  
 
 
 
I.4  
Termination Of Status As A Customer  
The ISO shall have the right to terminate a Customer for the reasons stated, and in the manner specified, 
in the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy and ISO New England Billing Policy.  
 
 
 
I.5  
Force Majeure, Liability and Indemnification  
 
I.5.1.  Force Majeure:  
Neither the ISO, a Transmission Owner, a Schedule 20A Service Provider nor a Customer will be 
considered in default as to any obligation under this Tariff if prevented from fulfilling the obligation due 
to an event of Force Majeure; notwithstanding the foregoing, no event of Force Majeure affecting any 
entity shall excuse that entity from any payment, charge, penalty, financial consequence or settlement 
responsibility that it is obligated to make under this Tariff.  An entity whose performance under this Tariff 
is hindered by an event of Force Majeure shall make all reasonable efforts to perform its obligations 
under this Tariff, and shall promptly notify the ISO, the Transmission Owner, a Schedule 20A Service 
Provider or the Customer, whichever is appropriate, of the commencement and end of each event of Force 
Majeure.  
 
I.5.2.  Liability:  
The ISO shall not be liable for money damages or other compensation to the Customer for actions or 
omissions by the ISO in performing its obligations under this Tariff or any Service Agreement 
thereunder, except to the extent such act or omission by the ISO is found to result from its gross 
negligence or willful misconduct.  A Transmission Owner shall not be liable for money damages or other 
compensation to the Customer for acts or omissions by such Transmission Owner in performing its 
obligations under this Tariff or any Service Agreement thereunder, except to the extent such act or 
omission by such Transmission Owner is found to result from its gross negligence or willful misconduct.  
A Schedule 20A Service Provider shall not be liable for money damages or other compensation to the 
Customer for action or omissions by such Schedule 20A Service Provider in performing its obligations 
under this Tariff or any Service Agreement thereunder, except to the extent such act or omission by such 
Schedule 20A Service Provider is found to result from its gross negligence or willful misconduct.  To the 
extent the Customer has claims against the ISO, a Transmission Owner or Schedule 20A Service 
Provider, the Customer may only look to the assets of the ISO, a Transmission Owner or Schedule 20A 
Service Provider (as the case may be) for the enforcement of such claims and may not seek to enforce any 
claims against the directors, members, shareholders, officers, employees or agents of the ISO, a 
Transmission Owner or Schedule 20A Service Provider or Affiliate who, the Customer acknowledges and 
agrees, have no personal or other liability for obligations of the ISO, a Transmission Owner or Schedule 
20A Service Provider by reason of their status as directors, members, shareholders, officers, employees or 
agents of the ISO, a Transmission Owner, Schedule 20A Service Provider or Affiliate.  In no event shall 
the ISO, a Transmission Owner, Schedule 20A Service Provider or any Customer be liable for any 
 
 
incidental, consequential, multiple or punitive damages, loss of revenues or profits, attorneys fees or costs 
arising out of, or connected in any way with the performance or non-performance under this Tariff or any 
Service Agreement thereunder  Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this section shall diminish a 
Customer’s obligations under  Section I.5.3 of this Tariff or under Schedules 18, 20 and 21 of the OATT.  
 
I.5.3.  Indemnification:  
Each Customer shall at all times indemnify, defend, and save harmless the ISO, the Transmission Owners 
and the Schedule 20A Service Providers and their respective directors, officers, members, employees and 
agents from its properly allocable share of any and all damages, losses, claims and liabilities by or to third 
parties arising out of or resulting from the performance by the ISO, Transmission Owners or Schedule 
20A Service Providers under this Tariff or any Service Agreement thereunder, any bankruptcy filings 
made by a Customer, or the actions or omissions of the Customer in connection with this Tariff or any 
Service Agreement thereunder, except in case of the ISO, gross negligence or willful misconduct by the 
ISO or its directors, officers, members, employees or agents, and, in the case of a Transmission Owner or 
Schedule 20A Service Provider, the gross negligence or willful misconduct by such Transmission Owner 
or Schedule 20A Service Provider or its directors, officers, members, employees or agents.  Each 
Customer shall also reimburse the ISO for any indemnity payments made by the ISO pursuant to an 
operating agreement filed with the Commission.  The ISO shall recover the amounts due from each 
Customer under this Section I.5.3 through Section IV.A of the Tariff in the same manner as the ISO 
recovers insurance expense (premium) costs, and each Customer shall be responsible for a share of the 
amounts due from all Customers under this Section I.5.3 that is proportionate to its responsibility for a 
share of such total insurance expense (premium) costs.  The amount of any indemnity payment or 
reimbursement of indemnity payment hereunder by a Customer shall be reduced (including, without 
limitation, retroactively) by any insurance proceeds or other amounts actually recovered by the 
indemnified or reimbursed party in respect of the indemnified action, claim, demand, cost, damage or 
liability or ISO indemnification payment.  The obligations of each Customer to indemnify the ISO, 
Transmission Owners and Schedule 20A Service Providers shall be several, and not joint or joint and 
several.  
 
 
 
I.6  
Dispute Resolution:   
Any dispute arising under this Tariff shall be the subject of good-faith negotiations among the ISO, the 
Transmission Owner, the Schedule 20A Service Provider, and a Customer, as applicable, unless otherwise 
stated in this Tariff, except that disputes concerning Schedules 18, 20 and 21 shall be resolved directly 
between the Customer and the MTO, OTO, Schedule 20A Service Provider or PTO, as applicable, using 
the procedures specified below.  Each affected party shall designate one or more representatives with the 
authority to negotiate the matter in dispute to participate in such negotiations.  The affected parties shall 
engage in such good-faith negotiations for a period of not less than sixty (60) calendar days, unless:  (a) a 
party identifies exigent circumstances reasonably requiring expedited resolution of the dispute by the 
Commission or a court or agency with jurisdiction over the dispute; or (b) the provisions of this Tariff 
otherwise provide a party the right to submit a dispute directly to the Commission for resolution.  Any 
other dispute that is not resolved through good-faith negotiations may be submitted by any party for 
resolution to the Commission, to a court or to an agency with jurisdiction over the dispute upon the 
conclusion of such negotiations.  Any party may request that any dispute submitted to the Commission for 
resolution be subject to the Commission’s settlement procedures.  Notwithstanding the  
foregoing, any dispute arising under this Tariff may be submitted to arbitration or any other form of 
alternative dispute resolution upon the agreement of all affected parties to participate in such an 
alternative dispute resolution process.  
 
 
I.7  
Creditworthiness:   
Exhibits IA through ID to Section I of the Tariff provide the ISO’s credit review procedures and the types 
of security that are acceptable to the ISO to protect against the risk of non-payment, and shall be binding 
upon Customers.  
 
 
 
I.8  
Rights Under The Federal Power Act:   
Nothing in this Tariff shall restrict the rights of any party to exercise its rights under relevant provisions 
of the Federal Power Act.  
 
 
 
I.9  
Pre-Existing Contracts:  
To the extent that Customers are parties to pre-existing wholesale power or transmission service contracts 
effective as of the Operations Date, and further, to the extent that provisions in such pre-existing 
wholesale power or transmission service contracts make reference to the Restated New England Power 
Pool Agreement (“RNA”),  then such provisions shall remain in effect but the references to the RNA 
contained therein shall be deemed instead to make reference to the applicable provisions in the 
agreements and tariffs filed in connection with the establishment of the ISO, as determined pursuant to 
Attachment C of the Tariff, i.e., the Mapping Document.  
 
 
