 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECTION IV.B 
 
CAPITAL FUNDING ARRANGEMENTS 
 
 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
IV.B.1 Definitions: 
 
IV.B.2 Purpose of and Charges Assessed Under Section IV.B 
 
IV.B.2.1 
The CFC 
IV.B.2.2 
The EAC 
IV.B.2.3 
The EAWCC 
IV.B.2.4 
The EPSFC 
 
IV.B.3 Billing and Payment 
 
IV.B.3.1 
Billing Procedure 
 
IV.B.4 Regulatory Filings 
 
IV.B.5 Creditworthiness 
 
IV.B.6 Budgeting Process and Reports 
 
IV.B.6.1 
ISO’s Capital Budgeting Process 
IV.B.6.2 
Reporting of Incurred and Forecasted Capital Costs 
 
 
 
 
IV.B.1 Definitions:   
Whenever used in this Section IV.B, in either the singular or plural number, capitalized terms shall have 
the meanings specified in Section I of the Tariff.  
 
IV.B.2 Purpose of and Charges Assessed Under Section IV.B 
Section IV.B is the means by which the ISO collects:  (1) the revenues necessary, to the extent not 
obtained by the ISO through private financing, for the acquisition of capital assets required for support of 
the ISO’s operations; (2) any remaining unamortized costs of capital items financed by the ISO in the 
event of termination, acceleration or other required repayment of private financing approved by the 
Commission pursuant to Section 204 of the Federal Power Act and entered into by the ISO (or by ISO 
New England Inc. as an independent system operator prior to the Operations Date) in support of capital 
item acquisitions; (3) the working capital amount required by the ISO in the event of termination, 
acceleration or required repayment of private financing approved by the Commission pursuant to Section 
204 of the Federal Power Act and entered into by the ISO (or by ISO New England Inc. as an independent 
system operator prior to the Operations Date) (following approval thereof by the Commission pursuant to 
Section 204 of the Federal Power Act) to meet working capital requirements; and (4) amounts owned by 
the ISO in the event of termination, acceleration or required repayment of Shortfall Funding Arrangement 
financing approved by the Commission pursuant to Section 204 of the Federal Power Act and entered into 
by the ISO in support of weekly billing under the ISO New England Billing Policy. 
 
Section IV.B comprises four charges corresponding to the four categories of costs described above.   
 
 
The Capital Funding Charge (the “CFC”) will collect from the Market Participants funds for the 
direct purchase of capital assets if the ISO does not enter into private financing to fund these 
purchases or the ISO funds the purchases through interim financings and does not enter into private 
financing to provide long-term funding of these purchases   
 
 
The Early Amortization Charge (the “EAC”) will collect from the Market Participants remaining 
unamortized costs of capital items financed by the ISO in the event of termination, acceleration or 
required repayment of private financing, or in the case of non-amortizing private financing, payment 
at maturity if the ISO is unable to refinance such non-amortizing private financing, entered into by the 
ISO (or by ISO New England Inc. as an independent system operator prior to the Operations Date) in 
 
 
support of capital item acquisitions, including refinancings in support of such acquisitions. 
 
 
The Early Amortization Working Capital Charge (the “EAWCC”), will collect from the Market 
Participants such funds as are required to fund the working capital amount in the event of termination, 
acceleration or required repayment of private financing entered into by the ISO (or by ISO New 
England Inc. as an independent system operator) in support of its working capital needs.   
 
 
The Early Payment Shortfall Funding Charge (the “EPSFC”) will collect from the Market Participants 
such funds as are required to be paid by the ISO in the event of termination, acceleration or required 
repayment of the Shortfall Funding Arrangement financing entered into by the ISO in support of 
weekly billing under the ISO New England Billing Policy. 
 
The ISO will not, and will not cause anyone else to, seek a revocation or termination of the EAC, 
EAWCC or EPSFC, or seek any modification thereto that would adversely affect the rights of the ISO’s 
lenders during the terms of the ISO’s private financing agreements or while any indebtedness or other 
obligations of the ISO are outstanding thereunder. 
 
IV.B.2.1  The CFC 
As stated above, the CFC recovers the acquisition costs of the ISO’s capital items that have not been 
otherwise funded by private financing or another source of funding. 
 
The cost of each capital item is allocated among the three Services corresponding to the extent to which 
that capital item is utilized in providing the Service.  
 
To assist the Market Participants in their planning for payments of the CFC, if the ISO determines that it 
needs to assess a CFC, the ISO will post on its website, in advance of collection, a non-binding estimate 
of cash flow requirements of the ISO (for the upcoming calendar year or portion thereof) with respect to 
acquisition of the ISO’s capital items, and allocated among Schedules 1, 2 and 3 to Section IV of the 
Tariff. 
 
Each month, the ISO shall bill each Market Participant, and each Market Participant shall pay, as its CFC:  
(1) the proportion of the capital costs allocated to Schedule 1 actually incurred by the ISO during the 
preceding month equaling the proportion of the Market Participant’s charges under Schedule 1 to the total 
charges to all Market Participants under that rate schedule during the preceding month; (2) the proportion 
 
 
of the capital costs allocated to Schedule 2 actually incurred by the ISO during the preceding month 
equaling the proportion of the Market Participant’s charges under Schedule 2 to the total charges to all 
Market Participants under that rate schedule during the preceding month; and (3) the proportion of the 
capital costs allocated to Schedule 3 actually incurred by the ISO during the preceding month equaling the 
proportion of the Market Participant’s charges under Schedule 3 to the total charges to all Market 
Participants under that rate schedule during the preceding month. 
 
For example, if the Schedule 2 capital costs and the Schedule 3 capital costs incurred in the preceding 
month are $500,000 each, and the Market Participant’s share of total charges to Market Participants under 
Schedule 2 for March was 5%, and the Market Participant’s share of total charges under Schedule 3 for 
March was 3%, the Market Participant’s CFC that month would equal (for Schedule 2) $500,000 x .05 or 
$25,000, plus (for Schedule 3) $500,000 x .03 or $15,000, for a total CFC of $40,000. 
 
IV.B.2.2  The EAC 
In the event of termination, acceleration or required repayment of private financing, or in the case of non-
amortizing private financing, payment at maturity if the ISO is unable to refinance such non-amortizing 
private financing, entered into by the ISO (or by ISO New England Inc. as an independent system 
operator) in support of the ISO’s capital items and if no replacement financing has been obtained by the 
ISO, an EAC will be billed to, and paid by, each Market Participant.  The ISO shall provide electronic 
notice (no less than thirty (30) business days in advance of the date payment is due to the ISO’s lenders) 
to each Market Participant of the aggregate amount of the unamortized costs of the financed assets (the 
“EA Amount”), and the portion of the EA Amount assigned by the ISO to each of the Schedules (the 
“Announced Schedule 1 EA Amount,” the “Announced Schedule 2 EA Amount,” and the “Announced 
Schedule 3 EA Amount,” respectively).  The foregoing assignment by the ISO of the EA Amount to each 
of the Schedules 1, 2 and 3 to Section IV of the Tariff shall be made in proportion to the total respective 
value of capital items allocated to each of the Schedules 1, 2 and 3 to Section IV of the Tariff.  In each 
such circumstance, the ISO shall, immediately after giving the notice described above, bill each Market 
Participant and each Market Participant shall pay, as its EAC:  (1) the proportion of the Announced 
Schedule 1 EA Amount equaling the proportion of the Market Participant’s charges under Schedule 1 to 
the total charges to all Market Participants under that rate schedule during the month previous to the 
month in which the foregoing notice has been given; (2) the proportion of the Announced Schedule 2 EA 
Amount equaling the proportion of the Market Participant’s charges under Schedule 2 to the total charges 
to all Market Participants under that rate schedule during the month previous to the month in which the 
foregoing notice has been given; and (3) the proportion of the Announced Schedule 3 EA Amount 
 
 
equaling the proportion of the Market Participant’s charges under Schedule 3 to the total charges to all 
Market Participants under that rate schedule during the month previous to the month in which the 
foregoing notice has been given.   
 
For example, if the Announced Schedule 2 EA Amount and the Announced Schedule 3 EA Amount in 
April are $500,000 each, and the Market Participant’s share of total charges to Market Participants under 
Schedule 2 for March was 5%, and the Market Participant’s share of total charges under Schedule 3 for 
March was 3%, the Market Participant’s EAC would equal (for Schedule 2) $500,000 x .05 or $25,000, 
plus (for Schedule 3) $500,000 x .03 or $15,000, for a total EAC of $40,000.  
 
IV.B.2.3  The EAWCC 
In the event of termination, acceleration or required repayment of private financing that has been entered 
into by the ISO (or by ISO New England Inc. as an independent system operator) in support of the ISO’s 
working capital requirements, and if no replacement financing has been obtained by the ISO, an EAWCC 
will be billed to, and paid by, each Market Participant.  The ISO shall provide electronic notice (no less 
than thirty (30) business days in advance of the date payment is due to the ISO’s lenders) to each Market 
Participant of the aggregate amount of the working capital amount (the “EAWW Amount”).  In each such 
circumstance, the ISO shall immediately bill each Market Participant and each Market Participant shall 
pay, as its EAWCC, the proportion of the EAWW Amount equaling the proportion of the Market 
Participant’s charges under Schedules 1, 2 and 3 to Section IV of the Tariff to the total charges to all 
Market Participants under Schedules 1, 2 and 3 to Section IV of the Tariff during the month previous to 
the month in which notice has been given. 
 
For example, if notice is given in April that the EAWW Amount is $1,000,000 and the Market 
Participant’s share of total charges under Schedules 1, 2 and 3 to Section IV of the Tariff for March was 
4% of all charges to all Market Participants, the Market Participant would be charged an EAWCC of 
$1,000,000 x .04 or $40,000. 
 
IV.B.2.4  The EPSFC 
In the event of termination, acceleration or required payment of the Shortfall Funding Arrangement 
financing that has been entered into by the ISO in support of weekly billing under the ISO New England 
Billing Policy, and if no replacement financing has been obtained by the ISO, an EPSFC will be billed to, 
and paid by, each Covered Entity.  The ISO shall provide electronic notice (no less than thirty (30) 
business days in advance of the date payment is due to the ISO’s lenders) to each Covered Entity of the 
 
 
aggregate amount of the Early Payment Shortfall Funding Amount (the “EPSF Amount”).  In each such 
circumstance, the ISO shall immediately bill each Covered Entity and each Covered Entity shall pay, as 
its EPSFC, a pro rata portion of the EPSF Amount allocated in the same manner as specified in Section 
5.4(c) of the ISO New England Billing Policy for payments required from Covered Entities to restore the 
Required Balance. 
 
IV.B.3 Billing and Payment Billing Procedure 
With respect to charges under this Section of the Tariff, the ISO will apply the ISO New England Billing 
Policy. 
 
IV.B.4 Regulatory Filings 
Nothing contained in this Section IV.B. shall be construed as affecting in any way the right of the ISO to 
file with the Commission under Section 205 of the Federal Power Act and pursuant to the Commission’s 
rules and regulations promulgated thereunder for a change in any rates, terms and conditions, charges, 
classification of service, Service Agreement, rule or regulation. 
 
Nothing contained in this Section IV.B. shall be construed as affecting in any way the ability of any 
Customer under Section IV.B to exercise its rights under the Federal Power Act and pursuant to the 
Commission’s rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
 
IV.B.5 Creditworthiness 
The ISO will apply the creditworthiness provisions of the ISO New England Financial Assurance Policy 
to the Market Participants.  Each Market Participant shall comply with the requirements of the ISO New 
England Financial Assurance Policy.  
 
IV.B.6 Budget Process and Reports 
 
IV.B.6.1  ISO’s Capital Budgeting Process:   
As part of its annual budget process, the ISO will submit to the Budget and Finance Subcommittee the 
ISO’s proposed budget for capital expenditures.  After taking into consideration the comments of the 
Budget and Finance Subcommittee, the ISO will submit its proposed budget for capital expenditures to 
the Participants Committee.  The ISO shall report the results of all Participants Committee votes on the 
ISO’s capital budget to the ISO’s Board of Directors which shall have sole authority to approve the final 
ISO capital budget.  Following such approval and at least 60 days prior to the beginning of the ISO’s 
 
 
operating year, the ISO will file its capital budget with the Commission.  All annual capital budget and 
expenditure filings will be filed pursuant to, and subject to Commission review under, Section 205 of the 
Federal Power Act and posted on the ISO’s website.  
 
IV.B.6.2  Reporting of Incurred and Forecasted Capital Costs:   
Consistent with the requirements imposed by the Commission in Docket No. ER02-2153, the ISO will 
file quarterly reports with the Commission specifying, by  project, the ISO’s prior year spending on multi-
year projects, year to date spending and a forecast of the next calendar year spending.  In addition, the 
ISO will file a schedule of the unamortized costs of the ISO’s funded capital expenditures at the end of 
the quarter and the allocation of those costs to Schedules 1, 2 and 3.  Such reports will be filed within 
forty-five (45) days of the end of each quarter and posted on the ISO’s website.  All quarterly capital 
budget and expenditure filings will be filed pursuant to, and subject to Commission review under, Section 
205 of the Federal Power Act.  
